*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 67393 ***

                                  THE

                           FOURTH BATTALION
                            THE KING’S OWN

                      (Royal Lancaster Regiment)

                                  AND

                             THE GREAT WAR


                    Lieut.-Colonel W. F. A. WADHAM

                                  and

                          Captain J. CROSSLEY


                                                            _COPYRIGHT_




                               CONTENTS.
                                              _Page._

    CHAPTER I.     EARLY DAYS                      7

    CHAPTER II.    FESTUBERT                       21

    CHAPTER III.   PICARDY                         32

    CHAPTER IV.    ARRAS                           48

    CHAPTER V.     THE SOMME                       58

    CHAPTER VI.    YPRES                           73

    CHAPTER VII.   THIRD BATTLE OF YPRES           82

    CHAPTER VIII.  GIVENCHY                       110

    CHAPTER IX.    CONCLUSION                     134

    APPENDICES                                   I–XX

    INDEX                                    XXI–XXIV




                               FOREWORD


_These notes have been compiled, more or less in the form of a diary,
with a view to placing on record the services of those who voluntarily
came forward to serve their country in its hour of need._

                                                   WALTER F. A. WADHAM.

   _February, 1920._




                         THE FOURTH BATTALION

                        THE KING’S OWN REGIMENT

                           AND THE GREAT WAR

              NOTES BY LIEUT.-COL. W. F. A. WADHAM, V.D.




                              CHAPTER I.

                              EARLY DAYS.


The year 1914 will for ever be looked back upon as the most memorable
in the history of the Battalion.

The outbreak of the Great War in the month of August of that year
caused the Mobilization Scheme, over which for years past each
succeeding Adjutant had, in his turn, burned much midnight oil in
endeavours to bring up-to-date the efforts of his predecessor, to be
put to the test.

On Sunday, August 2nd, of that year, the Battalion proceeded to Camp at
Kirkby Lonsdale to undergo the usual fourteen days’ Annual Training as
one of the units forming the West Lancashire Brigade of the Territorial
Force. War and rumours of War then filled the air, and, upon arrival at
Kirkby Lonsdale, a warning was issued by the Brigade Commander (Colonel
G. L. Hibbert, D.S.O.) for the units composing the Brigade not to make
themselves too comfortable, nor to make preparations for any lengthened
stay, as orders had been received to detain the trains in which the
troops had arrived, and further orders for the troops to return to
their peace stations were hourly expected. These orders duly arrived in
the early hours of Monday, August 3rd, and at 9.30 a.m. the Battalion
started on its homeward journey, after the shortest Annual Training on
record.

The Detachments proceeded to their various peace Headquarters, and the
men were dismissed to their homes, with a warning that, in the event
of the expected Mobilization taking place, they would be immediately
recalled.

Germany having violated the neutrality of Belgium by attempting to
utilize that country as a high road to Paris, Great Britain declared
war on Germany on the 4th August, 1914, and on the night of the
4th/5th, orders were issued throughout the country for the Mobilization
of the Territorial Force. The Mobilization telegram reached
Headquarters about 6 p.m. on the 4th, and notices were at once issued,
and the Battalion began to assemble at 5 a.m. on the 5th, for Medical
Inspection. At 7 a.m. the Headquarter Companies had been medically
inspected and at once left to guard the Kent and Leven Viaducts and
by 4.30 p.m. that day, with the exception of the guards left by the
Ulverston Detachment to protect the Kent and Leven Viaducts and by the
Millom Detachment to protect the Duddon Viaduct, the Battalion had
assembled in Barrow, and, under the command of the Officer Commanding
Barrow Coast Defences, taken over important duties in connection with
the protection of the works of Messrs. Vickers and the Harbour and
Docks of the Furness Railway Company. Headquarters were established
in the Holker Street Schools, and the surplus men, not required for
guards, were billeted there.

Little of any importance or worthy of note occurred during the time the
Battalion was stationed in Barrow, an air-raid scare, involving the
standing to arms of all ranks for several hours in the middle of a very
cold night, forming the only excitement.

The time was chiefly devoted to obtaining mobilization stores,
ammunition and equipment (not forgetting transport, which, in these
early stages of the war, was a most heterogeneous selection, varying
from a milk float to a motor lorry, with water carts commandeered from
the Local Authorities). The animals necessary for their haulage were an
equally varied selection, including about every kind of “hairy” from a
polo pony to a Clydesdale.

It was generally expected that the Battalion’s next move would be to
Ireland, and the advance party started off for that destination on the
morning of August 8th, only to be recalled from Liverpool later in the
day, owing to an order having been received cancelling the move.

On the 10th the Battalion was relieved from all duties in connection
with the Barrow Defences, these being taken over by another Battalion,
and on the 11th orders were received to move to Ulverston that day. The
Battalion left Barrow at 6.15 p.m. on the 11th, and proceeded by road
to Ulverston, arriving about 9.15 p.m.

In Ulverston the men were billeted in the Victoria Grammar School and
the Dale Street Schools, Headquarters being established in the former.
Whilst stationed at Ulverston the fitting out with equipment and
drawing of mobilization stores was continued, drill and route marching
filling up the time. On the 15th August orders were received (at 2.45
a.m.) to move to Slough for the purpose of guarding the Main Line of
the Great Western Railway, between Paddington and Maidenhead.

The Battalion left Ulverston on the 15th, in two trains (the first at
10.30 a.m. and the second at 12 noon), and arrived at Slough at 7.30
and 10.30 p.m. respectively. The second train was delayed owing to one
of the horse boxes falling to pieces at Crewe, thereby causing serious
injuries to the animals it contained, and our first casualty, one of
the horses being so seriously damaged that it had to be shot.

On arrival at Slough the Battalion was billeted in various schools
for the night, and the following morning divided up by Companies.
These were distributed amongst the different stations on the length
of line--from Paddington to Twyford--allotted to the Battalion.
Headquarters were established at Slough, in a large empty house with
spacious grounds surrounding it, which quickly acquired the soubriquet
of “Black Lead Castle,” owing to one of its former occupants having
rejoiced in the name of Nixey. A black cat, “which went with the
place,” succeeded to the title of the former occupant.

At the stations along the line the officers and men were accommodated
in the waiting rooms, without bedding, furniture, or comforts of any
description, and lived in these comfortless places for rather more than
three months, during which period the Battalion was carrying out the
duties of patrolling the line and guarding the bridges, etc., their
food being sent through from Slough in dixies.

Great ingenuity was displayed by the members of the various detachments
on the line in their endeavours to make their quarters, if not
comfortable, at least habitable. The palm must be awarded to the Millom
Detachment at Langley Park, where, under the able direction of the
Company Cook, and with the assistance of a refuse tip alongside the
railway, on which every conceivable kind of kitchen utensil seemed to
have found its last resting place, a quite substantial and up-to-date
kitchen was erected, and, with the aid of a huge Beecham’s Pills (or
other) advertisement board and some borrowed (?) waggon sheets, a
commodious lean-to shelter was constructed. The homeliness of the
shelter was completed by the addition of a tame fox, with which,
contrary to the usual laws of animal affection, an Airedale terrier
used frequently to indulge in gambols like those of a pair of kittens.

It was not to be expected that men fresh from the country, many of
whom had never seen an express train before, could carry out these
duties on a section of line such as the one for which the Battalion was
responsible, without some casualties occurring. During the time the
Battalion was employed on this duty several good men lost their lives
in the service of their country, who would no doubt have preferably
made the same sacrifice, had the opportunity been given them, against a
more vulnerable foe than an express train.

The Battalion Reserve (chiefly composed of recruits) remained at
Slough, where it underwent the usual course of Infantry Training,
including a certain amount of Musketry at Runnymede, a very different
thing however, at the beginning of the War, from the course of
training which developed as the War proceeded.

It would be difficult to exaggerate the strain upon discipline involved
in stringing out a Battalion of young and inexperienced soldiers upon
a 30 miles length of railway, in close proximity to London and other
places of interest and pleasure, or the additional responsibility thus
thrown upon the Officers and N.C.O.’s, especially when all were anxious
to proceed overseas at the earliest possible moment, and realized that,
after being withdrawn from the duties of guarding the railway, it would
be necessary for them to undergo a period of Battalion and Brigade
Training before being considered qualified to do so. Naturally, some
little impatience was displayed, but the Battalion’s reputation for
good discipline was well maintained.

Any spare time was chiefly devoted to football and cross country
running, with a view to getting the members of the Battalion as fit as
possible. The Battalion teams, drawn from all the stations on the line,
achieved considerable success in both these forms of sport.

For the mounted Officers, and those aspiring to become mounted, the
proximity of Windsor Great Park proved a great attraction, and effected
considerable improvement in their equitation. The Golf Clubs of Stoke
Poges and Burnham Beeches were kind enough to make the officers of the
Battalion honorary members, but no time was found in which to take
advantage of this privilege.

For the men a Club was organized by the Vicar, who was throughout most
kind in doing all in his power to make the visit of the Battalion to
Slough one which would call forth pleasant memories in the future. In
fact, the general hospitality and kindness extended to all ranks of the
Battalion during the time it was stationed in Slough was extraordinary,
and was most gratefully appreciated.

Whilst at Slough an enquiry was received from the War Office as
to whether the Battalion would proceed to Egypt to join the East
Lancashire Brigade. To this a reply was sent to the effect that the
Commanding Officer preferred that his Battalion should remain with the
West Lancashire Brigade. At a later date an order was received to send
two Companies to join the East Lancashire Brigade in Egypt, and these
were withdrawn from the line and equipped ready to proceed. In the
meantime a protest was made against the breaking up of the Battalion,
and, at the last moment, after two Companies from a Battalion from the
West of England had arrived at Slough ready to take over the duties
of the Companies withdrawn from the line, a message was received
cancelling the order, with instructions to return the two Companies to
the West of England.

On November 9th the Companies of the Battalion, except those at
Paddington and a few posts at other places, were withdrawn from the
line, and on November 26th orders were received to move to Sevenoaks to
join the remainder of the Brigade, which had moved there on the 11th.
The Battalion left Slough in two trains, the first at 11 a.m. and the
second at 1.15 p.m., on the 27th November, reaching Sevenoaks the same
evening.

At Sevenoaks the Battalion was billeted in the St. John’s end of the
town, in empty houses, which, like the railway waiting rooms, were
totally devoid of beds or furniture of any kind. The absence of any
large buildings or halls suitable for drill, recreation or social
purposes, in the area allotted to the Battalion, was also noticeable,
and hardly conducive to comfort or efficiency.

The time at Sevenoaks was devoted to Battalion training, various areas
for this purpose being allotted in turn to the Battalions forming the
Brigade, amongst these being Knole Park, The Wilderness, Chevening
Park, etc.

Musketry parties from time to time proceeded to Sandwich, Sittingbourne
and Shoreham. The Battalion was also called upon to furnish a guard
for the T.N.T. Store, which had been established in the caves at
Chislehurst, and a visit of inspection to this guard invariably
disclosed something of fresh interest.

Christmas, 1914, found half the Battalion still at Sevenoaks, and half
at Sandwich for musketry, and, though some disappointment was caused
at first by the edict that no Christmas leave was to be granted, all
pulled together to make the best of the circumstances, and, with the
kind and generous assistance of friends at home and newly made friends,
the day passed off most successfully.

On the 22nd February, 1915, the billets of the Battalion being required
for the accommodation of a Battalion of the New Army which was passing
through Sevenoaks, the Battalion moved to Margate, where, on its
arrival, it was received officially by the Mayor and Corporation, and
proceeded to billets in excellent and well furnished houses at the
Westcliff end of the town. During the time the Battalion remained in
Margate, every kindness was extended to its members, and the visit will
always be looked back upon by those who were fortunate enough to share
in it (the guard at Chislehurst and the Musketry Party at Shoreham
missed it) as a pleasant interlude in the hardships of training for
war; the only regret connected therewith being the brevity of its
duration.

On the 28th February the Battalion returned to Sevenoaks, only to
receive orders on the 1st March to proceed to Tonbridge before 11 a.m.
on the day following. During the period at Sevenoaks many warnings of
a sudden move, including one to the East Coast for immediate service
after the bombardment of Scarborough, which arrived just as the
Battalion returned from a twenty miles march, reached the Battalion.
Although none of these materialized, they naturally caused uneasiness
at the time.

The Battalion left Sevenoaks at 10.30 a.m. on March 2nd, and proceeded
by road to Tonbridge, arriving about 1 p.m. At Tonbridge the Battalion
occupied billets at the south end of the town, and was stationed
here until April 18th, the time being devoted to Battalion training.
As, however, it was called upon to furnish guards at Dungeness,
Birling Gap and Cuckmere Haven, in addition to that already provided
at Chislehurst, the strength was considerably diminished, and there
was little opportunity for the Battalion to assemble as a complete
unit. In spite of this, steady progress was made in the training,
and frequent route marches with full equipment, combined with night
operations at intervals, contributed towards the hardening of the men,
who were rapidly getting into first-class fighting form. Games were not
neglected, and, on Easter Monday, most successful Athletic Sports were
held on the grounds of the Tonbridge School, very kindly placed at the
disposal of the Battalion for the occasion.

On the 14th April warning was received that the Battalion was shortly
to move to Bedford to join a Lancashire Brigade in the 51st (Highland)
Division, and to proceed overseas with that Division at an early date.
The Battalion left Tonbridge at 5.55 a.m. on April 18th, and arrived at
Bedford at 9.20 a.m., its arrival creating a most favourable impression.

At Bedford the time was chiefly occupied in handing in old clothing and
equipment, and receiving and fitting new. This exchange included new
transport--both animals and vehicles--the mixed assortment which had so
far served the purpose, together with a large assortment of antiquated
and superfluous stores of every variety, having been left behind at
Tonbridge.

The long period of training at home came to an end on the 3rd May,
1915, and in the afternoon of that day the Battalion left Bedford to
join the British Expeditionary Force on the Western Front.

During this early period of the war, various problems as to how to
obtain a sufficient number of men to send overseas and to retain an
adequate number to carry on the work in munition factories, seemed to
be perplexing the minds of the authorities, the uncertainty as to the
right course to adopt having anything but a beneficial effect either on
recruiting or training.

At first, returns were called for asking for the number of men willing
to transfer from the Territorial Force to the Line Battalions, but
this met with little response. Then returns as to how many men would
volunteer for foreign service with the Line Battalions were called
for, with similar results. Eventually, and happily, it was decided to
ask the Territorial Battalions to volunteer for service overseas as
complete units. This they did practically without exception. At first
each man was given the opportunity of deciding for himself whether
he would serve overseas or be transferred to a second line unit for
service at home, but, later, only men unfit for general service were
posted to the second line.

As regards the men required for munitions, the fact that the Battalion
was drawn from an area in which the Barrow works of Messrs. Vickers
were situated, caused great difficulty in obtaining the necessary
number of men to recruit its ranks up to war strength. In addition
to this, the constant withdrawal of men--chiefly those formerly
employed by Messrs. Vickers--who had already undergone a lengthened
period of training, and of whom several had become efficient N.C.O’s,
was a severe handicap. The result of these conditions was that the
Battalion was not sufficiently up to strength to proceed overseas with
the remainder of the Brigade, the units of which commenced to leave
Sevenoaks during the second week in February, 1915.

This caused much chagrin and disappointment, which was, however,
somewhat mitigated by the confidence in the efficiency of the Battalion
manifested by the higher authorities in entrusting to us so many
onerous and responsible duties and, eventually, sending it overseas
when very considerably under strength, and at a time when the situation
in the war area was extremely tense.

The route was via Folkestone and Boulogne, the transport having
proceeded in advance via Southampton and Havre. The channel was
crossed in the dark, darkness still prevailing on arrival at Boulogne,
and deluges of rain added to the discomforts of disembarkation. The
remaining hours of the night were spent in the camp on the top of
the hill, a wind-swept place where the Indian tents, at that time,
provided poor shelter.

After breakfast the following morning (May 4th), the Battalion started
off down the other side of the hill to the station, and here joined
the train conveying the transport from Havre, speculation as to its
destination being somewhat rife. So far as the railway journey was
concerned the destination proved to be Berguette, from which station
the Battalion marched to Ham-en-Artois, and joined the Brigade.

Here the Battalion had its first experience of close billets in
a foreign land, and those to whom a barn, with some hay or straw
in it, was allotted, considered themselves literally, as well as
metaphorically, in clover.

In these early days of the war everything was exceedingly primitive,
not only with regard to the billets, but also the food and feeding
arrangements. However, stout hearts and good spirits overcame all
difficulties, and the time for which all had been waiting so long,
viz., to get overseas, having at last arrived, the realization of this
ambition caused all hardships and discomforts to be accepted cheerfully.

The Battalion remained at Ham until the evening of May 6th, when it
moved via Busnes, Robecq, and St. Venant, to Calonne-sur-la-Lys, to
form a reserve for the Fromelles show. A long distressing march was
carried out by the Brigade in darkness and rain lasting throughout the
night, during which progress was frequently delayed by other troops at
cross roads, railway crossings, etc.

At Calonne the billets were very similar to those at Ham, the
Headquarters being established in an old Mill House. Whilst here the
Battalion thankfully made acquaintance with the baths improvised for
the troops, and the opportunities offered for a change of clothing.
The members also had their first introduction to Indian Native Troops,
units of the Meerut Division coming in to rest and refit during the
time the Battalion was at Calonne. The town was well within the
sound of the guns at the front, and at night the sky was brilliantly
illuminated by their flashes.

On 13th May the Battalion moved to Meteren (in readiness to proceed
to Ypres), via Merville, Neuf Berguin and Vieux Berguin, taking over
billets from the Canadian Royal Field Artillery. Whilst the Battalion
was in Meteren the first Artillery of the New Army to arrive in France
passed through, and the Horse Show provided thereby provoked the
admiration of all beholders.

May 19th saw the Battalion move southwards once more, through Bailleul
and the two Berguins, to La Gorgue, near Estaires--another long wet
night march. Here it occupied the filthiest billets so far met with.
Large numbers of both officers and men were allotted the buildings,
including the Chapel, of a Convent School, the floors of which were
inches deep in mud, whilst the grounds surrounding the buildings seemed
to have been used for some time as the town refuse tip.

Luckily, another move further south to Locon, was made next day. This
was a much more habitable and congenial spot, where the proximity of
the La Bassee Canal afforded facilities for bathing, and the town of
Bethune, in spite of daily shell fire from the Huns an excuse for a
ride.

The only incident to be recorded during the stay of the Battalion in
Locon was an ear splitting competition between a battery of French
“75’s,” which arrived in the village one evening, and a thunderstorm,
which seemed to resent its presence. The thunderstorm won, and,
incidentally, did considerable damage.

Whilst in Locon one N.C.O. and two men from the Lincolns, with
experience of trench warfare, were attached, as instructors, to each
Company, prior to their going into the trenches at Richebourg L’Avoue.
In later days New Army Battalions were sent into the trenches in
driblets--“opposite numbers”--Platoons and Companies, to mix with
trench troops and become well acquainted with trench duties before
taking over duty as units, but the Territorial Force had no such
preliminary training. The Battalion subsequently had the honour of
initiating several Battalions of the New Army into their duties.

The night of the 24th/25th May, 1915, marked the Battalion’s first
introduction to the trenches. It was allotted a section near the
Ferme-du-Bois, in the neighbourhood of Richebourg L’Avoue, which it
took over in the dark hours of the night, and where it underwent
its baptism of fire with singularly little protection, owing to
the inadequate and dilapidated condition of the trenches. However,
it survived the ordeal with considerable credit, and, luckily, few
casualties, a congratulatory order being issued by the Brigade.

On taking over the trenches at Richebourg L’Avoue, the first duty was
to open up communication with the front line, and turn the parapet of
the recently captured fire trenches round the other way so as to face
the enemy, also to remodel and establish second and third line trenches
and construct communication trenches and dugouts, the existing ones
being simply rivers of mud and quite impassable. When taken over there
were practically no dugouts and the men not actually on duty had to
rest lying in the mud in the trench bottom, not even on duck boards,
these luxuries being few and far between.

The bodies of troops engaged in the last assault lay unburied, and the
collection of identity discs, the burial of the dead, heavy labour at
trench construction, and constant readiness to repel a counter-attack,
heat and overpowering smell in the day, and intense cold at night, and,
withal, a shortage of water, were the first experiences.

During the time of its occupation of these particular trenches, the
Battalion produced a marked improvement in their condition. The only
grievances given vent to by the men were their inability to reply to
the Huns’ game of long bowls, the noise created by the continuous night
firing of the Ghurkas’ Maxim Guns on the left, which disturbed their
rest, and the difficulty of locating snipers.

On the night of May 28th/29th the Battalion was withdrawn from the
trenches to take up its “rest” quarters at the Redout, near Le Touret.
However, owing to the too assiduous attentions of the Huns, who
commenced to shell the place heavily immediately on the Battalion’s
arrival, inflicting a few casualties, a further withdrawal to the
village of Le Touret was made the following morning, and on the 1st
June, still further back to the village of Riez-du-Vinage. Here the
Battalion remained until the night of the 5th/6th June, when it again
proceeded to the trenches.

This time the section allotted was a portion of the old German trench
in the much-fought-over Festubert area, and these, again, were of very
indifferent construction, both as regards their protective value and
the facilities afforded for comfort. The Battalion was here subjected
to several daily bursts of shelling at more or less regular intervals,
the casualties inflicted being mercifully altogether disproportionate
to the amount of ammunition expended.

On June 9th the Battalion found itself once more at Le Touret for a
spell of rest, and on the 10th was moved further back to Cornet Malo,
just as the Huns were getting the range of Le Touret.

It was with much regret that on the 10th June I was compelled to leave
the Battalion and proceed home on sick leave, the command thereof
devolving upon Colonel (then Major) Thompson.

This did not, however, entirely sever my connection with the Battalion
as, upon recovering my health, I assumed command of the 3rd/4th
Battalion at Blackpool on 13th December, 1915. This Battalion proceeded
to Oswestry on 19th April, 1916, and subsequently (having absorbed the
3rd/5th Battalion) became the 4th Reserve Battalion in which--during
my period of command--approximately 250 officers and 4,500 other ranks
were trained and despatched in drafts to units serving overseas; the
majority joining my old Battalion, the writing of the further history
of which I am content to leave in the able hands of one who continued
to serve with it.

                                                   WALTER F. A. WADHAM.

_13th November_, 1935.




                          FOREWORD TO PART II


_The task of writing the following pages has fallen to me. Now
that the duty has come my way, I have done my best, after a lapse of
more than fifteen years, with the material available, and am aware
of many omissions and imperfections. These have been kept as few as
possible._

_The record is written primarily for friends in the Battalion. No
literary merit is claimed, and should the book fall into the hands
of the general reader, his indulgence in this respect is solicited.
It has been pleasant labour (bearing in mind our glorious dead), and
up to May, 1917, when I left the Battalion, I am not dissatisfied
with the result. From that time onwards is another matter. I was
reluctant to attempt a story in which I was a non-participant, and
used every means to get this part written by someone more qualified
for the task. I was unsuccessful, and it became a question of the
record remaining unwritten, or myself making the most of the position
as it stood. Fortunately, powerful support was at hand in the person
of Lieut.-Colonel R. Gardner, M.C., who served with the Battalion
throughout, and, towards the end of the war, attained Command. This
Officer has edited, and largely re-written, considerable sections
relating to this later period. More would have been warmly welcomed
(especially dealing with the remarkable stand of the Battalion at
Givenchy), but he is a busy man, and scholastic duties intervened. My
very real thanks are due to Colonel Gardner._

_Major N. E. Barnes, T.D., Major W. G. Pearson and Captain P. W.
Powell, M.C., have been helpful, and I have drawn gratefully on Captain
R. B. Ross’ charming book, “The Fifty-First in France.” (Hodder &
Stoughton). Acknowledgement is due to the courtesy and assistance
given by the Committee of Imperial Defence, the War Office, and
Lieut.-Colonel R. J. Brook, C.B.E., D.S.O., the Officer Commanding 4th
Battalion The King’s Own Royal Regiment._

                                                    JAMES CROSSLEY.

_Ulverston_,
    _December_, 1935.




                    1/4th BATTALION THE KING’S OWN
                      (ROYAL LANCASTER REGIMENT)
                           AND THE GREAT WAR

_This narrative commences on the 10th June, 1915, the date on which
Lieut.-Colonel Wadham’s notes entitled “Early Days” ends._




                              CHAPTER II.

                              FESTUBERT.


We left England under the impression that our military training was
complete. There was one item, however, of which we had learnt little,
and that was bombing. It was now impressed upon us that this weapon
would play an important part in trench warfare. A Bomb School was
therefore formed at a farmhouse between Lacouture and Richebourg St.
Vaast. Qualified instructors were appointed, and a party under Lieut.
G. F. Taylor was furnished from the Battalion. Material was scarce and
equipment primitive, consisting at first of the home-made Battye. These
were roughly made of cast iron. The bombers had to cut their own fuses,
fix them into the detonators, attach the patent lighter, and wire the
whole together--a laborious and lengthy task. The bomb when completed
was unsuitable for transport, but could be easily thrown. There were
other types being tried, percussion and time fuse. The percussion
(Hale) soon lost favour, and we went through many varieties of time
fuse, the light and heavy R.L., the Pitcher and the Hairbrush, until
finally a selection was made of the Mills bomb, which stood the test
well, being handy, portable and effective.

We now had the misfortune to lose the services of the Commanding
Officer, Lieut.-Col. W. F. A. Wadham, who was ordered to the Field
Ambulance, and eventually to England on medical grounds. He had done
fine work for the Battalion, and it must have been largely due to his
efforts that we were enabled to land in France at all. The strain had
taken its toll. It was bad luck to lose him, but medical opinion admits
of no argument.

[Sidenote: _June_, 1915]

The Command devolved upon Major R. Thompson (promoted acting
Lieut.-Colonel) with Major N. E. Barnes as Second-in-Command.

Rumour, always busy, had for some days prevailed that the 154th Brigade
to which we belonged was to be entrusted with an operation more
ambitious than usual, and for once rumour was correct. A conference
was held at Brigade Headquarters at Locon on the 13th June, and at
7 p.m. the following day the Battalion left billets at Le Cornet
Malo, and moved by Companies along the familiar Route C, to take over
trenches at Festubert. The transport also moved nearer to the line at
Le Touret. By 10 p.m. the Battalion commenced to arrive in the old
British trench, and were all in by 11.30. Contrary to arrangements this
trench was already occupied by the 1/6th Scottish Rifles, and room was
made in the reserve trench. The intended operation was an attack by the
7th Division, Canadian Division, and our own (the 51st) on the enemy
position on the line Chapelle St. Roch-Rue d’Ouvert. After a 48 hours’
continuous bombardment our mine at Duck’s Bill was fired. At 6 p.m.
on the 15th our attack commenced under heavy artillery fire from the
enemy. It was led by the 1/4th Loyal North Lancs, on the right, and the
1/6th Scottish Rifles, with the 1/4th King’s Own and 1/8th Liverpool
(Irish) in support.

“A” Company (less party selected from two platoons under Command of
Lieut. R. Gardner for Brigade Relay Posts and less other details) were
ordered to occupy and hold Sap L. 8.

“B” Company moved to the old fire trench, and “C” Company moved forward
to take their place in support. “D” Company moved into support trench,
and it was reported that two lines of German trenches had been occupied
by 6.20 p.m. “D” Company were in position at 6.50 when a number of
wounded of the 6th Scottish Rifles passed through. At 7.20 all reports
from the front were satisfactory. At 8 p.m. “B” and “C” Companies
were ordered to push on in support of the Loyals and Scottish Rifles,
who asked for reinforcements. “D” were ordered to the fire trench and
arrived at 8.25 p.m.

The progress of “A” Company (less detachment) to Sap L. 8 was delayed
by blocks ahead, and bridges broken by shell fire, but they reached
their position and performed their allotted duty. “D” Company moved
forward to support the Loyals, and threw back their right flank whilst
trying to get into touch with the Grenadier Guards. At 9 p.m. the last
platoon of “D” Company was sent from the reserve trench to rejoin their
Company in front. The 8th Liverpools commenced to arrive and moved
two Companies to the old fire trench, and one to support. Battalion
Headquarters got into touch with the firing line through Lieut. Taylor,
the Bombing Officer. Lieut. A. A. Wright, in charge of the Machine Gun
Section, was ordered to reinforce the firing line. This move commenced,
but could not be completed and the machine guns were buried as the
result of enemy shell fire. All the Companies concerned exhibited great
gallantry and performed their duties with devotion, and showed fine
discipline and steadiness, and excellent fighting qualities. Between
10 and 11 p.m. a retirement was ordered. “D” Company still tried to
establish contact with the Grenadier Guards on our right, but this was
not effected until some two hours later.

An Officer of the Loyals reported at Battalion Headquarters about
midnight, but could give no clear information of conditions in front.
At 12.30 a.m. on the 16th, the German counter-attack was delivered,
artillery support was impracticable, heavy casualties had occurred
amongst the Officers of the attacking battalions, no supports came
up on our right, and our right flank was therefore in peril. Enemy
pressure increased, and retirement along the line was effected in good
order.

At 1.45 a.m. an order was received to re-form the Battalion in the
reserve trench, and a Battalion from the 152nd Brigade moved up in
support, the 8th Liverpools taking over the old fire trench. On relief
the Battalion assembled at Le Touret at 10 a.m. on the 16th.

Such is the bare outline of events on this memorable night. Let us
examine them a little more closely and see what they reveal. It would
be natural to assume that the result of the encounter was negative,
seeing that the relative positions of the opposing forces now remained
as before. It had been rumoured that this Action was to synchronise
with an attack on a large scale by the French between Arras and La
Bassée, but this idea was dispelled when it was found that the troops
on our right did not co-operate.

The educational effect on the Battalion was profound, and the young
soldier, who less than twelve months before had stepped out along
Dalton Road, Barrow, or Market Street, Ulverston, etc., with the gay
irresponsibility of Saturday night, and was now thrown into this
cauldron of war, recognized its realities in a way he would never
forget. He had seen death in battle at close quarters, and was to look
at things in a different light thenceforward.

Of course there were the inevitable casualties, matters that went
astray, and bad luck. Five minutes after the attack commenced, the
telephone line to Brigade Headquarters broke down, and messages had
to be transmitted by the relay posts previously referred to. This
part of the work was very well carried out under Lieut. R. Gardner of
“A” Company. Lieut. Hewitt of “A” Company, the Assistant Adjutant, a
most able Officer, was killed and his loss was severely felt. Lieut.
Bigland of “B” Company was killed in the fire trench before the advance
commenced, and it was never clearly known how Lieut. Walker met his
fate. Captain W. G. Pearson with “B” Company followed up the Loyals in
attack, and the Company was well inside the German lines when he was
hit by shrapnel and went down. Unfortunately he could not be found
when the retirement took place. He was eventually picked up by the
Germans and made prisoner. Almost as trying, after the retirement was
ordered, was the finding and evacuation of wounded and stragglers.
Sergeant Bell did good work, returning again and again to the front
so long as any could be found. Lance-Corporal “Tommy” Dixon also was
prominent in this connection. The notorious “L. 8,” a sap following the
line of a natural ditch twining away from our trenches to the German
lines, and in “peace time” one of the plague spots from enemy fire, was
occupied by “A” Company (less detachments) and was most valuable as a
defence post, and also as a covered way for getting our wounded back
into our lines.

The element of surprise in this attack was lacking. The enemy seemed
to be well-informed of our intentions. He held his reply to our
bombardment until almost the very moment of our attack and then opened
a heavy artillery fire on our troops in their assembly positions, and
caused many early casualties. In the fighting in the German trenches
the enemy had the advantage of an adequate supply of bombs, whereas
our supply became exhausted and the bombers were handicapped owing
to forward ammunition dumps having been destroyed by the enemy’s
artillery. The deciding factor, however, appeared to be the withering
cross fire which the enemy was able to bring to bear upon our troops
when crossing no man’s land.

To the onlooker the scene was one of terrible grandeur. The bombardment
swelled to titanic proportions. Looking towards the line the eye was
dazzled with the multitude of lights. Now it was the flash of exploding
shells, now the slow glare of Very lights and rockets arching in the
sky. Sometimes the thunder of the artillery softened into a muttering,
when the tattoo of the machine guns became audible. The suspense of
waiting was almost unbearable.

And so from this action the Battalion emerged, sadly depleted in
strength by five Officers (three killed, one wounded and prisoner,
one wounded) 147 other ranks (ten killed, 32 wounded and missing, 58
wounded, 37 missing and ten sick). Sergeant Bell received the Military
Cross, which must be almost a unique award to one so junior. It was,
however, a fitting recognition of one who even at this early period
of his service, showed a natural flair for soldiering, which his
subsequent distinguished career has confirmed.

A Special Order by Brigadier-General G. L. Hibbert, D.S.O., Commanding
the 154th Infantry Brigade was issued as follows:--

“The Brigadier has received personal instructions from Lieut.-General
Sir H. Rawlinson, Commanding IV Corps to convey to the Brigade his
appreciation of the gallantry shown by all ranks in the attacks of the
15th and 16th instant under very trying circumstances.

“The Brigadier wishes to add on his own behalf his appreciation of the
pluck and spirit evinced by all and while he deplores the heavy losses
incurred congratulates the Brigade on the fine fighting qualities
displayed.”

At 6 p.m. on the 16th the Battalion moved from Le Touret to billets
at Pacaut, where it “rested” until the 22nd. The blessed word “rest”
developed into one of the standing jokes of this period, and this
time took the form of General’s inspection, when he complimented the
Battalion on its recent work. Working parties were provided for the
trenches, and these found and brought back our buried machine guns.
All requirements in arms and equipment were replaced and the Battalion
had a two hours’ route march. On the 22nd we moved back to Le Touret,
where the same routine of working parties was carried on. On the 25th
we marched to Estaires.

The folly of hearkening to idle report was never more triumphantly
proved than now. It had been in the mouth of everybody that another
week would see us at Armentières, or even further north. The rumour did
not go bare and ungarnished. The most unlikely things were prophesied.
Before the week was old the exact date of our leaving the Western
front and embarking for India had been determined to the complete
satisfaction of everyone, and no one dared to dispute a rumour which
had emanated from the padre, and had received his benediction.

The Division did _not_ go to Armentières, nor did it go much
further north. It took over trenches in the sector of Laventie, and it
was to the village of Laventie that the Battalion now went to billet.
Laventie had been entered by the Germans in October, 1914, and vacated
after the lapse of six days owing to the pressure of stronger forces,
or in conformity with the general plan. Although separated from the
front line by a distance of only three miles, it was still inhabited
by many of the citizens, principally on the outskirts of the town. The
centre of this place, from which radiated all the chief roads, was
marked by the ruins of the church, a mere shell, and as sad a spectacle
as could be witnessed in all this martyred region. True to their faith,
many of the Catholics still clung to their dearest possessions and one
cannot fail to remember the brave nuns of the Hospice, who refused to
abandon their infirm charges to the fury of the oppressor. We found the
place was still shelled almost daily.

On the 26th the Commanding Officer, Colonel Thompson, and others
inspected the trenches. The trenches in the sector of Laventie partook
of the nature of breastworks, and were in a much better state of repair
than those at Festubert and Richebourg L’Avoué. It would seem that the
fighting in this quarter had not attained the same infuriate heat as
elsewhere. The temporary fever during the operations for the seizure
of Aubers Ridge had subsided, but the enemy still held the commanding
ground; and our line, forming a wide but not a deep re-entrant, skirted
the base of the ridge from Fauquissart to Neuve Chapelle. The defensive
system on the whole, seemed to be too insecure and vulnerable. Its
liability to rupture, if subjected to the intensity of a bombardment
and the crushing weight of a massed attack, appeared obvious to
everybody. There was but one main line of trenches running parallel
to the Rue Tilleloy, but in rear a succession of isolated forts,
adequately served, fenced off this fertile country from the onsets
of the enemy. Four of these fortified redoubts were strung along the
Tilleloy Road from Chapigny to Fauquissart, and a fifth was isolated
slightly in rear.

It was a task, therefore, of the first importance to provide an
adequate defensive trench system, and the Battalion began to prove
itself active in the necessary labour. The Germans, on the other hand,
from whom we were separated at an average interval of 150 yards,
possessed all the natural favours of the ridge. They had at least a
triple belt of defence, with the additional advantage of numerous
communication trenches. Behind their front line were farms capable of
being put into a very solid state of defence, such as Ferme Deleval,
Trivelet, La Distillerie, Les Mottes Ferme, and the Moulin du Pietre.
As their line receded, the trees grew more and more abundantly, wherein
they were able to conceal large numbers of guns. They had also the
inestimable advantage of full observation from the ridge. Surmounting
this high ground lay the village of Aubers, fed by a light railway.
This natural bulwark, in the hands of skilful troops, could resist the
strongest frontal pressure that could be brought to bear upon it.

At 8.45 p.m. on the 27th, Companies commenced to move off to take over
trenches from the 8th Liverpools, and by 10.45 the relief was complete.
This was not bad going considering that no trench maps were available.
Periscopes also were not on view at this period. It was comparatively
quiet in the trenches but it was soon found that sniping by the enemy
was the order of the day. This was a nuisance as considerable work
remained to be done on parapets, dugouts and communication trenches.
Good progress was made notwithstanding, and in a few days improvement
was apparent.

[Sidenote: _June–July, 1915_]

At 10 p.m. on the 30th there was a short bombardment by our artillery,
and it is to be noted how short and inadequate our bombardments were at
this time. Even at Festubert when a serious attack was contemplated,
and after intensive gun fire, it was remarkable how much enemy wire was
left standing in virgin serenity and uncut. This was not due to any
lack of skill on the part of the gunners, but to lack of shells, which
were understood to be limited to three shells per gun per day. Things
remained quiet but persistent sniping continued. On the 2nd July we
had a visit by the G.O.C. the 51st Division, also Officers of the 5th
Gordons, who had received orders to relieve us. Suspicions were being
formed that the enemy was laying mines to our detriment, and not only
that, but actually placing field guns in his front line. At 9 p.m. on
the 3rd the relief commenced, and working smoothly, the Battalion were
all out of the trenches by 11 p.m. and marched into billets close to
Laventie Station. Snipers had accounted for Privates Tyson and Dodd,
killed, and Sergeants Pickin and Clampitt, wounded.

The usual routine of rest billets followed, numerous working parties
for the trenches being furnished, and much sanitary work had to be
undertaken to make the billets habitable. On the 5th the Brigade
paraded for inspection by General Sir James Wilcocks, Commander of the
Indian Corps, of which we formed part, and the General was good enough
to express his satisfaction with what he saw. The Battalion sighed
happily when it was all over. These functions of the highly placed have
an uncanny knack of raising fears and tremors out of all proportion
to the occasion, and it is not without humour to reflect that the
majority would cheerfully prefer a turn in the trenches to one of these
devastating ordeals.

Up to this time organized bathing facilities were non-existent, and
it was only in intermittent streams, accidentally met, that we could
indulge the craving for a thorough soak. This, too, could only be
gratified at the expense of much diffidence, as it had to be carried
out in the vicinity of the local population. This deficiency was now
being overcome, and in certain centres baths were in existence, where
the troops could revel in real hot water and soap. This was not all.
They could hand in their soiled and inhabited underwear, and receive
in exchange another set, sweet and clean, a boon indeed. One of these
bathing centres was at La Gorgue, of dismal memory, but now changed to
an enchanting oasis. The brewery had been taken over for the purpose,
and the vats provided ideal receptacles for soiled soldiers in mass
formation. Pandemonium, made up of songs, shouts and laughter, during
these grateful ablutions, conveyed to the authorities approval of the
wisdom of their kindly ministrations. It was, then, to the baths at La
Gorgue that the Battalion marched by Companies on the 7th and 8th, and
returned refreshed and enthusiastic.

[Sidenote: _July, 1915_]

Working parties went out nightly to the trenches, where the task of
strengthening the defences went on incessantly, one of the parties
being shelled en route, and two men were wounded. The billets at
Laventie too, received their customary shelling from the Hun, but the
tortured church again bore the brunt, and no other damage was done, and
there were no casualties. At 6 a.m. on the 9th orders were received to
take over trenches, and in the evening the move commenced, the relief
being completed by 10 p.m. The Battalion held the four posts and small
ammunition depot in rear of the line, the trenches being held by the
4th Loyals and Scottish Rifles. On the 11th the Machine Gun Section
went into the line in relief of one gun each of the Loyals and Scottish
Rifles. The 12th was notable for the presentation to Sergeant Owen of
the Distinguished Conduct Medal for the action at Rue d’Ouvert, and our
snipers accounting for two of the enemy.

At 9 p.m. on the 15th the Battalion moved into the trenches in relief
of the 4th Loyals and Scottish Rifles, and at 10.45 the relief was
complete, but we suffered three casualties from rifle fire. On the 17th
those insufferable pests, civilian snipers, were seen behind our line.
A keen hunt for this new quarry was immediately organized, but without
success for the moment. They are wary birds, and the nest is seldom
near where they operate.

Evidence that further moves were in contemplation, not only for the
Battalion but for the Division, was forthcoming when the trenches were
visited by the Staff of the 8th Division, and the usual curiosity and
conjecture was indulged as to our destination. It was interesting and
intriguing, but, after past experience, fantastic forecast was absent,
opinion more sober, and there was a disposition to “wait and see.” This
visit was speedily followed by orders for the relief to be carried out,
and on the 23rd we handed over to the 2nd Royal Welsh Fusiliers. This
was completed at 11 p.m., and at 11.30 the Battalion marched to billets
at Estaires, near La Gorgue. Here equipment and clothing were issued,
and on the 25th Lieut. E. Tillyard and one N.C.O. left by motor car for
the new area on billeting duty. This area was now definitely understood
to be the Somme.




                             CHAPTER III.

                               PICARDY.


Our stay at Estaires was short, and at 9.45 a.m. on the 27th we
marched via St. Venant to Berguettes (where we had detrained on our
first arrival three months previously), twelve miles distant, on the
Nord Railway, and there entrained. The train consisted of the usual
enormously long string of closed wagons “8 Chevaux 40 Hommes,” with
here and there a dilapidated passenger coach. We passed westward
through Hazebrouck and St. Omer, west into the night, and crept slowly
over the flats, deeper and darker, until the twinkling lights of
Calais, and the fresh fair faces of women, reminded us of home.

The first greys of morning were just showing through the trees when the
sleepy-eyed Battalion, once freed from the choking confinement of the
wagons, stretched its stiffening limbs and breathed a purer air. First
impressions are as a rule deceptive, but our first impressions of the
Somme, when we detrained that lovely morning at Mericourt-Ribemont,
lingered for many a day as a sweet memory. The period that followed was
one of inestimable preciousness to us. The free wholesomeness of the
air, the fresh breezes that served but to stir the leaves and ruffle
the pools, contrasted strangely with the clogging miasmas of Flanders.
We felt ourselves excited with the discovery of a new world. The whole
landscape to our appreciative eyes appeared to be lapped with a beauty
as yet untarnished by the impurities of war. The skies were tricked out
with a new colouring. In the north the dawn came up with splendours
that were hidden from us. The mists blinded the sunrise in Flanders.

Lieut. Tillyard, who had motored south to arrange the billets, met us
at the station with rosy accounts of our new area. His reception had
been enthusiastic, if somewhat overshadowed by the superior attractions
of the uniform of our Highland brethren of the Division, especially
the kilt, which was a source of unending wonder to the local population.

We marched away from the leafy arches of Mericourt, that seemed to
invite the tired traveller to revel in their coolness. New vistas
opened out before us. On our right hand a sugar refinery shot its
well-known ugly chimney into the skies. On our left hand a roadside
shrine seemed to invite a moment’s meditation. But there, in front, joy
to our hearts, lay the broad rolling uplands, topped with yellowing
corn, that went before the breeze in glistening waves. There were a few
early harvesters at work--old men with sunken cheeks and women with
toiling hands, who paused for a moment to gaze at the novel sight of
the British “Tommee” on the march.

A new wonder now brought amazement to our faces--those marvellous
national highways that take no account of contours, but run, arrow
straight, for miles. That on which we set foot at this time was known
as the “Route Nationale No. 29 de Rouen.” From Amiens to Albert it ran
with scarcely a single deflection. And, as was a feature common to
all these national roads, magnificent trees bordered it from end to
end. Even in the case of secondary roads attempts were made to utilise
the waste lands contiguous. Apple and plum trees were growing by the
roadside, their boughs bending with fast ripening fruit. These were all
communally owned. France and Belgium are, verily, the high schools of
thrift.

The Battalion went into billets at the quaint and attractive little
village of Bouzincourt. It was not an elegant village. Its houses all
looked jerry built; it adopted no particular plan. Bouzincourt was
the communal centre of a large agricultural district. There were no
outlying isolated farms. All were collected within the boundaries of
the village, in order to secure mutual protection. Each house in the
village had its barns and byres attached. One man was no richer than
his neighbour, and there was no incitement to ambition. The men who
remained, not subject to the military levies, were all old men. About
the village the most distinguished person was the curé, whose air of
aloofness and stern piety was spoiled by the fat and puffy appearance
of his housekeeper, visibly addicted to snuff, so that all fine
impressions vanished.

The Battalion was soon distributed round the village, the men in
comfortable barns and the officers in the farm houses. Dinner had been
prepared _en route_ in the travelling kitchens, and was served
immediately on settling down. Interest was languid and appetites
mechanical, and, due to the incessant movement and cramped travelling
of the past thirty-six hours, the troops sank into oblivion in this
restful arcadia.

[Sidenote: _August, 1915_]

It is usually the unexpected that happens. Instead of going into the
trenches straightaway day succeeded day in peaceful routine work, and
this period of our history in France approximated more closely to a
rest than any we had yet experienced. By this very immunity from trench
cares we missed what must have been a most interesting experience--that
of taking over trenches from the French army, who were now released for
service elsewhere. This engaging duty fell to the 8th Liverpools, who
took over the new sector on August 1st.

On August 3rd the commanding officer and two officers per company
visited the trenches, which were to the east of Aveluy, a village three
or four kilometres to the east of Bouzincourt, a direct road over a
ridge connecting the two. This road, the top and eastern slope of which
was in view of the enemy, was impracticable in daylight. A wide detour
had therefore to be made via Engelbelmer and Albert. On approaching the
latter place a first view was obtained of the damaged campanile of the
church--the Eglise Notre Dame de Brebières--a pitiful sight and one to
linger in the memory. The spectacle of the beautiful gilded statue of
the Mother and Child hanging perilously head downward, through the vile
attentions of the Hun, was moving in the extreme. There are some phases
of this war to be dismissed with a smile, but wanton destruction such
as this, the Cloth Hall at Ypres, Rheims Cathedral, and a hundred other
tragic horrors of fallen stones, can evoke only tears. Nothing can
atone for them, least of all German _Kultur_!

And so over the square, pitted with shell holes, out of the town again,
three kilometres to the north, and under the light railway running to
Guillemont and Combles, we come to Aveluy, a neat little village just
behind the line. It has had its share of attention by the enemy, but
is still inhabited by a section of the villagers. Down a declivity,
at the bottom of which flow the waters of the Ancre--a considerable
stream, limpid and pellucid, but suspect and taboo, as its head waters
are in the German lines. Over the culvert and up the other side,
past a roadside shrine, close to which are the ration and ammunition
dumps, and, meeting more rising ground, we come to the entrance of the
communication trench, which it was well to use.

The first effect of these remarkable trenches was speechless amazement.
These were trenches such as we had never experienced hitherto. In the
north we had been accustomed to sand-bagged breastworks; but here the
trenches were deep and wound serpent-wise, in a fashion that left the
stranger utterly bewildered. It was a labyrinthine system, constructed
according to the suggestion of the natural contours, and not following
any stereotyped plan, as at the Quinque Rue. On first acquaintance
with these amazing passages it was impossible to move about with any
assurance whatever. Not until a lengthy residence therein had made us
familiar with the names could we walk about with a perfect sense of
direction. The communication trenches crossed each other, doubled back,
affected the most bizarre forms.

Our new trenches, designated “F.1” sub-sector, spread fanwise over
a saddle of rising ground, disappearing on the northern extremity
into Authuille Wood, which was of considerable size. The names of the
trenches under their former French occupants had followed the system of
perpetuating the memory of French heroes who had died for their country
or otherwise rendered signal service. This system, admirable as it
seems, was now being replaced by our own more practical method, and we
found ourselves struggling from Post Donnet to Palatine, Fishergate,
or John o’Gaunt Street. The Battalion frontage was extensive,
approximating a mile in length. From its highest point, opposite
Ovillers, a magnificent enfilading view disclosed the wreckage of La
Boisselle, separated by a wicked little gut of very narrow width, known
as Sausage Valley, from the divisional trenches further on our right,
which were entrusted to our Highland comrades.

It was in these trenches that the French army had lived, relieved only
at irregular intervals. In the parados men had dug holes, where, two by
two, they slept like dogs in kennels, a curtain of rough sacking fixed
by a rusty bayonet, serving as a protection from wind and rain and sun.
Inside one eats, sleeps, sings, and sometimes dies. The shelters of the
officers are a little larger, and the first-aid posts have the choice
of security. Each company has its telephone and telegraph instruments.
A liaison is established between all posts of command. Here men are
reading, others are writing home those few words which mothers,
wives and sweethearts alone cherish for their preciousness. There a
stretcher-bearer is binding up a wound. By raising the head a strip
of blue sky can be seen. Yes, the sky can be blue at the front, the
flowers can bloom, and the birds can sing. Here and there was a piece
of chalk carving in which the French “Tommies” were vastly skilled,
or a welcoming banneret, such as “Pitou shakes hands with the British
Tommy.”

By their very scope and efficiency these trenches required constant
vigilance and attention to keep them in repair, and the Battalion
now began to furnish the usual nightly working parties for this
purpose. Otherwise life in Bouzincourt continued its pleasant and
uneventful routine. The weather was beautiful and the inhabitants
kind and hospitable to the best of their limited means. One of the
families stands out as a pleasing memory. M. and Madame ---- were the
owners of a roomy house standing back from the village street, the
front laid out as a garden, full of old-fashioned and sweet-smelling
flowers, geraniums, roses, hollyhocks and pinks. Monsieur was a
_cultivateur_ and looked after the outlying fields. The son was at
the front, as was the husband of the eldest of two daughters, Germaine
and Suzanne. The interior of this delightful household was as homely
and attractive as the exterior promised, and the family kindness
itself. The Battalion staff were allotted this peer of billets, and
afterwards the transport officer and the writer had the felicity to
succeed and so speak with authority and conviction.

On the 7th August, at 9 p.m., the Battalion marched over the ridge
by companies to take over trenches from the 8th Liverpools, and so
remained without a break for three weeks--eloquent testimony to their
habitableness. From the first things were comparatively quiet, and
we had to contend with only spasmodic shelling. On the 10th “C” and
“D” Companies, on the left, were bombarded during the morning. The
bombardment was intermittent, but “D” Company had an unpleasant time
from 12 noon to 12.30 and had one casualty. On the 14th some little
shelling occurred, and Private Burton, of “B” Company, was killed. A
new duty, and one which caused some swelling of pride, was now imposed
on us. For some time the new units of “Kitchener’s Army” had been
pouring into France, and very workmanlike they looked. Each night a
company from the 6th Royal Berks, and later from the 8th Norfolks,
arrived in our trenches for instruction and were relieved the following
night by another company. A diversion of an even more pleasurable kind
was to take possession of the Battalion from now onwards. We had been
three months at the front, and thus qualified for the privilege of
“seven days’ leave.” Parties were organised weekly and despatched on
their way to England, to the good-natured envy of those left behind,
who volunteered sound advice, which may, or may not, have been acted
upon by the fortunate ones.

On the 16th our heavy artillery bombarded La Boisselle on the right,
and the enemy replied later on our trenches. On the 17th there was
shelling of our line, and Lance-Corporal Woodward, of “B” Company, was
killed by a sniper, while on the 19th, after a very quiet morning,
we exploded a mine at La Boisselle and put in some big shells later.
The enemy retaliated with trench mortars and shrapnel and later his
machine guns fired on the communication trench and the road to Aveluy,
altogether rather a disturbed night. Private Robinson, of “C” Company,
had his face grazed by a bullet. On the 21st the Battalion was relieved
by the 8th Liverpool Irish and moved back to the support trench. The
weather remained perfect, but the nights were cold. The companies
held inspection of clothing and equipment and work was carried on
with deepening two new communication trenches. On the 23rd five new
officers joined the Battalion and were posted, Lieut. B. A. Leslie to
“B,” Second-Lieut. H. H. Hodkinson to “A,” Second-Lieut. C. G. Chapman
to “B,” Second-Lieut. G. J. Purnell to “C,” and Second-Lieut. E. D. M.
Meyler to “D” Company.

On the 28th August the Battalion was relieved by the Loyals and
5th Lancashire Fusiliers, and at midnight marched into billets at
Martinsart. The weather had changed, and the move took place in very
heavy rain, over muddy roads. This would have been bearable if decent
billets had been available on arrival, but, with the exception of
La Gorgue, these were the dirtiest and most dilapidated billets we
had encountered. The surroundings of this depressing village were a
sea of mud, where the unfortunate transport animals were picketed
standing fetlock deep. The Battalion was in Divisional Reserve,
and there were also located here details of the 1st Indian Cavalry
Division Headquarters. On the 29th the Commanding Officer reported at
Headquarters, 51st Division, at Senlis (a notable feature of which
place were the natural underground caverns) and also at Headquarters,
Indian Cavalry Division. Working parties were furnished on the 30th
and 31st for work on the roads at Bouzincourt, and in the trenches.
Bombing instruction was going on apace and three officers and one
hundred other ranks attended the Bombing School at Aveluy. Officers
from each Company also reconnoitred routes to Authuille, a small
village north-east of Martinsart. Time was spent on much-needed repairs
to billets, the weather continuing bad, more heavy rain falling at
this time. A few small shells were put into the village but no harm
was done, but on the 4th September ten more were dropped and Private
Drinkall, “C” Company, was wounded.

[Sidenote: _September, 1915_]

On this evening billets were handed over to the 5th Lancashire
Fusiliers, and the Battalion moved off to the trenches in relief of
three Companies of the 8th Liverpools in the old line, relief being
completed by 9.15 p.m. The night was very quiet. At 8 p.m. on the 5th
“B” Company sent out a reconnoitring patrol in front of the barbed
wire, who returned safely with some useful information. Soon after
midnight on the 8th an enemy patrol was captured. This patrol of one
Officer and three men came in at one of the listening posts on the
left of the sector. They came down the front of our wire and were
watched by our listening post, consisting of Lance-Corporal H. Martin
and Private J. Carrick, “D” Company, who waited until they were quite
close and then challenged. The enemy patrol at once surrendered. This
capture was excellently managed. The following night about a dozen
small calibre shells were sent over and the enemy appeared to be trying
to locate our listening post where the capture had been made. On the
12th Lance-Corporal Martin proceeded to Army Headquarters, where he was
presented with the Distinguished Conduct Medal and promoted Corporal
for his recent fine work. We were now negotiating the maze of trenches
with more confidence, and even the communication trenches held no
terrors for us. In traversing this trench at night from the line one
would encounter a weird apparition approaching from the opposite end,
and more by way of greeting than challenge, would call out, “Who are
you?” and the reply, “O’ll tell thi who I am lad, O’m a walking dump!”
was quickly confirmed when a shadow bearing a corrugated iron sheet, a
roll of wire and a duck board brushed past to its destination in the
front line. This gratifying intelligence genially imparted and duly
assimilated, both went their ways ruminating on the queerness of things.

The trenches had been previously inspected by the 152nd Brigade, and on
the 21st September we were relieved by the 5th Seaforth Highlanders.
The Battalion moved into billets at Hénencourt, a rather longer
march than we had had recently. We found the billets in fair order,
but experienced some trouble with the Officers of an entrenching
Battalion, which was eventually amicably settled. After this small
_contretemps_, and after seeing to the needs of their men, some
of the younger generation of our Officers started to forage for a
meal for themselves and finally settled on the estaminet in the main
street, “Au Petit Caporal,” as promising the best results--a prescient
choice. Any visitor to this village is strongly advised to call and
ask for mutton cutlets. They will delight his heart. Let him also ask
for Epernay, for the _cuvée_ is above reproach. The hospitable
Picard family of this inn included a grandam, on whom the asperities
of advancing age had not yet begun to make an impression. She sat in
her corner chair like a queen, very calm and dignified. Her regal
manners and pleasing countenance, combined with a natural affability,
were touching and striking proofs of a well-ordered household.
Madame prepared our cutlets, while Mademoiselle, whose unaffected
simplicity and distinguished mien proclaimed her at once a charming
kitchen-lieutenant, was pleased to serve us.

The time was now spent in the usual “rest” fashion, holding
inspections, making up deficiencies in kit, parades (not forgetting
pay parades), and route marching. On the 26th the Battalion quitted
billets and marched from Hénencourt to Aveluy. This march was not very
well carried out and caused some concern to the Adjutant. It had been
evident for some time that the step of the men was losing some of its
wonted fire, and this could confidently be ascribed to long periods in
the trenches, where, although there was an abundance of manual labour
to be done, pedal exercise was out of the question. We took over the
support trenches from the 6th Seaforths, the weather being wet and much
colder.

[Sidenote: _October, 1915_]

On October 1st, Brigadier-General Hibbert, commanding the 154th
Brigade, received a bullet wound in the shoulder when visiting Poste
Les Dos, and we were sorry to lose his guidance. One man of “B” Company
was also wounded at this post. An order was received reminiscent of
earlier days after mobilization, when the Battalion was decimated by
similar orders, for fourteen N.C.O.’s and men to return to England
for work in the Hodbarrow mines, but our trench stores were enriched
by the addition of forty-eight knobkerries--a fearsome weapon. We
were relieved in the trenches by the 5th Lancashire Fusiliers and
4th Loyals and went into billets at Aveluy. Second-Lieuts. Ward and
Keller joined and were posted to “A” and “B” Companies, respectively.
Working parties for the trenches were provided, as usual, but the men
preferred being in the trenches to proceeding there daily for work. On
the 7th, Brigadier-General Edwards took over command of the Brigade,
an appointment which, to our untutored minds, appeared unusual, he
being a Cavalry Officer. On the 8th we were inspected by Major-General
Harper, 51st Divisional Commander, taking over trenches and stores from
the outgoing Battalion in the evening. On this occasion these were not
found satisfactory. They strove to impress upon us that these trenches
were a paragon of comfort to what they themselves had taken over. It
was always curious to note how invariably sceptical of improvements
were any new comers. The qualities attributed to the “last lot in” were
never very flattering, but on this occasion we felt, with reason, that
we had not received a square deal and rebelled accordingly.

A period of comparative quiet followed our taking over. Patrols under
Second-Lieut. Hodkinson reconnoitred the ground in front of Ovillers,
and Private Walker, “C” Company, was slightly wounded. The Battalion
now encountered a further piece of bad luck on the 13th, when the
Commanding Officer, Lieut.-Colonel R. Thompson, was sent to the Field
Ambulance, wounded by shrapnel when in the fire trench, and the command
devolved on Major N. E. Barnes. Problems for the new C.O. were soon
forthcoming when Captain Jackson, the Adjutant, was appointed to act
as Brigade Major. This officer had done well in knitting the Battalion
together on and after mobilization, and, although we felt his loss
severely, everyone was pleased that his qualities had been suitably
recognised. He was a fine athlete, and many times had the Battalion in
difficulties trying to emulate his tireless pace at exercise. Captain
Tillyard was appointed to succeed him.

[Sidenote: _Oct.–Nov., 1915_]

The usual spasmodic shelling, rifle and machine gun fire was taking
place in the trenches. On the 21st we were relieved by the 8th
Liverpools, “A” and “D” Companies, and Battalion going to Lower Poste
Donnet and “B” and “C” Headquarters to Poste Lesdos. The weather at
this time was misty. On the 27th we were relieved by the Loyals and
Lancashire Fusiliers, and went into billets in Aveluy. On the night
of the 30th/31st the enemy fired about eighty howitzer and field gun
shells into the village. The majority, fortunately, did not explode,
and no billets were hit or damage done. Private J. Vincent, “C”
Company, was killed, and Sergeant Wells, “D,” and Corporal Holmes,
“A” Company, wounded on a night working party. On the 2nd November we
relieved the 8th Liverpools in the trenches. We found these in a very
bad state. A large part of the fire trench in “C” and “D” Companies
section had fallen in. Rivington and John o’Gaunt Streets were nearly
impassable. Immediate work on these was imperative. This was again
an opportunity for “D” Company to show its mettle. Many times had
these men from Millom, iron ore miners in peace time, wrought wonders
with pick and shovel, to the amazement (and admiration) of their less
skilled comrades. The trenches at Aveluy were but one more achievement
to their credit.

[Sidenote: _November, 1915_]

The weather was now definitely bad, cold, wet and the wind north-east.
It will be convenient here to refer to the “comforts” which, since
mobilization, had been collected and sent out to us by private
enterprise. These comforts consisted of many things, principally wool
underwear, socks and mufflers and tobacco and cigarettes. The Battalion
was extremely fortunate in its friends at home, and the severe weather
which now overtook us tended to emphasise those feelings of gratitude
which were present at all times. On the 7th we were relieved by the
6th Argyle and Sutherland Highlanders, and proceeded by Companies to
Hénencourt, where new billets were taken over, the next two days being
devoted to cleaning rifles and the more difficult task of cleaning
clothing. This was saturated with the thick, glutinous mud of the
trenches, and it was almost impossible to make any impression on the
greatcoats.

On the 10th, Lieut.-Colonel F. M. Carleton, D.S.O., assumed command of
the Battalion. He was an ex-regular Officer of the Regiment, who some
years previously had served as Adjutant of the Battalion. In addition
to the D.S.O., he wore the ribbons for the South and West African
campaigns and the Nile Expedition 1897. Almost at once the Battalion
began to feel the influence of a new personality. This influence had
the quality of the east wind, and, with all its tonic properties, the
Battalion felt impelled to brace itself unwontedly to meet its cutting
edge. Our education was not yet complete. We continued in rest billets
at Hénencourt until the 16th, when we marched to Authuille to relieve
the 7th Gordons in “G.1” sub-sector. The transport moved to Martinsart.

This new area, just north of our previous line at Aveluy, had
previously been reconnoitred by our Officers and was, therefore, more
or less familiar. It was roughly the segment of a circle, of which the
centre was the village of Authuille. The boundary radii were Campbell
Avenue and Thiepval Avenue. The former followed the course of the road
that inclined from Authuille to Ovillers. The other avenue led direct
to Thiepval of evil fame, until the bulwark of our front line rudely
cut it short at a point where a solitary telegraph pole shot up out of
an immense wilderness of weeds. Within this circumscribed area were
many once excellent trenches, but now in bad condition, and a few on
which a malevolent influence seemed continually to rest. The shelters
as they existed were designed to withstand only a moderate shelling,
were in poor condition, but they fulfilled our modest expectations.
All were accommodated in trenches or shelters, including Headquarters,
except the latter’s Mess. Some inspired scout had discovered a disused
and comfortable cellar in the village, and this provided an excellent
mess room. It was a very quiet period.

On the 22nd we were relieved by the 4th Loyals and went into dugouts
in Authuille. The chief desideratum was to keep warm, and the demands
on the Quartermaster for coal, coke and charcoal for the braziers were
peremptory. In the conveyance of these supplies the writer witnessed a
small epic in transport. The route led from Martinsart, where Driver
“Dorcas” Dixon harnessed his pair of mules to a limber and departed,
loaded above the military Plimsoll line. These mules, the pride of
their driver, were sleek creatures, slender-limbed and thin-flanked,
with a gliding motion deceptive to the uninitiated. Skimming along
with their 2½ ton burden all went well until, half-way through the
Bois d’Aveluy, the worn track crossed a shallow depression filled
with 18 inches of mud. The mules’ attempt to negotiate this was all
but successful, but they came to a compulsory halt just short. No
persuasion and certainly no violence would have stirred them. They had
done their best and achieved a splendid failure.

From the 23rd to the 27th was a very quiet period. The usual working
parties were furnished. A draft of forty-four men arrived, including
some we had left behind in England. Lieut. Brocklebank rejoined after
undergoing instruction in Adjutant’s duties with the 1st Cheshire
Regiment. On the 28th we were relieved by the 5th Seaforths and
returned to billets in Hénencourt. We had suffered only one casualty,
but we here lost the further services of Major Rutherford, the Medical
Officer, who was incapacitated by the recent rigours of trench life and
was now transferred for duty with the Divisional Field Ambulance. His
place was taken temporarily by Captain Titmas, R.A.M.C.

[Sidenote: _Nov.–Dec., 1915_]

Until the 5th December we followed the usual “rest” routine in these
well-tried billets. Much time was spent in removing mud from equipment
and clothing. This tenacious element, matter in the wrong place, added
considerably to the difficulties of marching. On this day we marched
back to trenches and relieved a unit of the 153rd Brigade on the left
of “F.1” sector at Aveluy. Three Companies were in the firing line
and one in support. The front line was divided into three groups, the
spaces in between being impassable owing to mud. The trench in the
middle of the salient was badly smashed up by a bombardment a few
days previously. Battalion Headquarters were at Lower Donnet. The
three Companies in the front line were relieved the following day by
two Companies (overstrength) of the 17th Highland Light Infantry, the
relieved Companies going into billets in Aveluy. Captain J. Caddy and
Lieut. J. A. T. Clarke joined from the third line unit. Captain Caddy
had served as Staff Captain of our Brigade until invalided some few
months previously and now rejoined for duty. He was succeeded as Staff
Captain by Captain J. Fisher. Some shells fell on Aveluy on and around
the railway bridge, and one man was wounded.

On the 11th we relieved the 17th Highland Light Infantry in the
trenches, where conditions were now exceedingly bad, especially for
“A” and “C” Companies. Mud was over the knees in most places. Things
were very quiet, accounted for by the fact that the enemy’s trenches
were in a similar predicament to our own, as reported by one of our
reconnoitring patrols under Lance-Corporal Bates. The time was occupied
in attempting to clean the trench, and cases of trench feet began to
occur through constant standing in the wet.

[Sidenote: _December, 1915_]

Captain J. V. Barrow and Lieut. A. Beardsley were here ordered to
proceed to England to report to the War Office and left the Battalion,
much to our regret. On the 16th we were relieved and marched back to
billets in Hénencourt. Here the usual peaceful routine was shattered
by a tragedy. Second-Lieut. Ward, whilst demonstrating to a class of
beginners in the use of Hand Grenade No. 1, accidentally exploded
the bomb, with the result that he was badly wounded and died almost
immediately afterwards. One man was killed and thirteen others wounded.
Needless to say this event cast a gloom over the remainder of our stay
in billets.

[Sidenote: _January, 1916_]

Lieut. J. H. C. Gatchell, R.A.M.C., was appointed Medical Officer of
the unit in place of Captain Titmas, and forty reinforcements arrived.
On the 21st we relieved the 6th Black Watch in Authuille village, with
“C” Company in Mound Keep, the time being devoted to cleaning shelters
and putting up wire beds. The enemy put over thirty-two shells in the
vicinity of Mound Keep, which seemed to be intended for MacMahon’s
Blockhouse. No shell hit the building and no casualties or damage was
done. We marked Christmas Day by moving into the front line in relief
of the 4th Loyals, and the Germans shelled Martinsart and killed one
of our mules. We were thankful to find the trenches comparatively
dry, and after being worked at, habitable. We here lost Major R. P.
Little, who was sent to hospital and thence to England, sick. Lieut. E.
Spearing had the bad luck to get in the way of a rifle grenade, which
he received in the shoulder, and went to the Field Ambulance, wounded.
Second-Lieut. Leslie Bowman joined the Battalion from the third line
unit. The trenches were fairly quiet, trench mortars being the chief
offenders. Several dud “oil cans” were sent over by “Fritz.” Evidence
had been accumulating for some time that moves on an unusual scale
were being contemplated. This evidence was confirmed when the Brigade
was relieved on the 2nd January by the 96th Infantry Brigade, and we
marched into billets once more at Hénencourt.




                              CHAPTER IV.

                                ARRAS.


All this time in France our Brigade had formed part of the 51st
(Highland) Division. This apparent anomaly--a Lancashire brigade in
a Highland division--arose through paucity of men and the consequent
necessity for compression and rearrangement of units in the early
days. The unusual association worked remarkably well. The subsequent
careers of the two Divisions--the 51st and 55th--on the Western Front,
both of which won outstanding reputations, serves but to emphasise the
sentiments of respect for a fine Division, which were ours throughout
the time we had the unique honour of serving with them. Times were
changing, and we were to get back to our own Lancashire formation.
What was to be our last stay in Hénencourt was very short, and on
the 3rd the Battalion girded itself together and set off on a series
of marches, by fairly easy stages, for its new destination. The end
of the first day found us at Montigny, and on the second at Coisy,
where Second-Lieut. P. J. Blundell joined us. Here we stayed two days,
and, continuing our movement further and further west, and further
and further away from the din and squalor of the trenches, we passed
through delightful country unspoiled by the ravages of war, through La
Chaussee, where we stayed one night, until on the 7th we marched into
Longpré-les-Corps-Saints, footsore and weary, and not ill-disposed to
the long rest which followed.

Henceforward we belonged to the 164th Brigade, 55th (West Lancs.)
Division. The process of collection and assimilation of the component
parts of a Division--Artillery, Royal Engineers, Infantry and the
Auxiliary Services--went on without a pause, under the supervision of
the new Divisional Commander, Major-General Sir Hugh Jeudwine, who
on closer acquaintance and in the fullness of time came to be known
by the affectionate and not disrespectful appellation “Judy.” The
Infantry units comprising the 164th Brigade were the 4th King’s Own,
8th Liverpool (Irish), 4th Loyals and 5th Lancashire Fusiliers. After
a rest and clean up we began to take stock of our new surroundings.
A sense of exhilaration and freedom from the clogging discomforts of
the trenches prevailed, and we were in no mood to be critical. Had we
been so fault could have been found with the billets, which should
have been of the best in this rural backwater. Quite clearly they
had been misused and adverse opinion of the “last lot in” was again
freely expressed. They were probably new arrivals in France, and only
experience would disclose the practical value of the adage “Do unto
others.” In putting this disorder to rights we had to overcome the
antagonism of the inhabitants to English troops caused thereby, and
many were the complaints to be heard and assuaged. A more cordial
atmosphere was eventually established, but the “last lot in” had
bequeathed a legacy of horse-work.

The surrounding country was well adapted for what followed. Battalion
training of a simple and not too strenuous nature. The land was
undulating in a pleasing way and eminently suited to small tactical
schemes. Here and there were patches of level ground where ceremonial
drill could be practised. The month being January no crops were
endangered, and the weather for the time of year was excellent. Time
was even found to form a class of equitation for Officers. This was
of the homely variety, and it is not without humour to review this
imposing parade. All the young gentlemen, not otherwise required for
duty, were mounted on a mixed lot of hairies, limber and pack animals,
those with a little previous knowledge adopting an attitude of bored
toleration to their less gifted colleagues. This pleasant exercise went
on for some time, but tragedy all but overtook it. Lieut. Hodkinson had
his long legs astride a yellow pack pony, the pony stumbled, and in
falling poor Hodkinson’s foot failed to disconnect with the stirrup.
The pony bolted, dragging its rider along the ground, and it had
travelled a score or two yards before it was stopped by the horrified
instructor. Hodkinson was unconscious, rather badly injured, and was
in hospital for many days before we saw him again. Equitation was
discontinued.

There arrived at this time a draft of sixty-three men, the largest
to be received so far, also Second-Lieuts. Corless, Myatt, J. Welch
and W. B. McCall joined the Battalion from the Third Line Unit, the
latter being posted to “D” Company. On the 17th a scheme of attack
was well carried out, the Signallers, under Sergeant T. H. Middleton,
particularly distinguishing themselves. On the 22nd we were inspected
and reviewed by the Brigadier, who was good enough to express himself
satisfied. This was a good result considering the small opportunity
we had had to practise this exacting ceremony. Captain Tillyard
relinquished his appointment as Adjutant and left for duty at Salonica.
He was a gifted linguist and his services were needed further afield.
He was succeeded by Lieut. H. A. Brocklebank, who now took over the
duties of Adjutant. Captain W. D. Barratt left the Battalion to be O.C.
at the new Divisional School at Hallencourt, and Captain J. M. Mawson,
having been appointed to the Staff at Etaples, was struck off the
strength of the Battalion. On the 26th, Lance-Corporal D. Winnicott,
“C” Company, proceeded to England, having been granted a Commission
in the Sherwood Foresters. On the 29th there was a Divisional
concentration march. The Battalion left Longpré at 8 a.m. and reached
Hallencourt at 10.45, where the whole Division was reviewed by the
Corps Commander, which ordeal having been negotiated successfully, we
returned to billets at 2.30 p.m.

Our pleasant stay at Longpré was rapidly drawing to a conclusion.
Having received its hall mark from the Corps Commander our newly-formed
Division began to bestir itself, and stretch its wings as it were,
prior to new flights. On the 30th January, 1916, at 12 noon, we left
Longpré for the last time and marched to Berteaucourt. The Commanding
Officer having gone on short leave, Major N. E. Barnes was in command
of the Battalion at this time. From here we marched to Candas, where we
were to have another lengthy stay under new conditions. Captain Wright
here rejoined from the Machine Gun Company and took over command of “D”
Company, Second-Lieut. Chapman replacing him.

Candas was a rather insignificant village in the back area, and its
importance now lay in its suggestion of a portent. The first stirrings
were evident of the giant which, in six months’ time, was to transform
the face of Northern France, and the whole aspect of the war. We were
now to be initiated into these beginnings and make acquaintance with
a remarkable organization--the R.O.D., or, to be less mysterious,
the Railway Operating Division. This marvellous enterprise was
run under the ægis of the Royal Engineers, but probably even that
distinguished Corps would disclaim full credit for all its activities
and achievements. Its personnel must have been largely recruited from
those to the manner born, and with the making and running of railways
in the blood, as it were. The rate at which these light railways were
growing, connecting existing systems, and extending eventually to the
very front, was a source of wonder and amazement.

The surroundings of Candas, flat and uninteresting, lent themselves
admirably to the service of yet another phenomenon making itself
manifest. The Royal Flying Corps, like the Artillery, had been with us
from the beginning, but in minute doses, and to see a British aeroplane
was an unusual experience. Powerful forces were at work to remedy this
deficiency, which before long were to give undisputed supremacy in the
air to the Allies. We found an Aerodrome established at Candas and
were prepared to pay homage to its novel personnel. But we reckoned
without our unwilling hosts; not only the canteens, but the village
estaminets were locked, bolted and barred against the alien. This was
a matter which called for instant adjustment. There were infantry
before Pontius Pilate, and this proud arm will survive when the odour
of petrol has once more been forgotten! We are not aware whether
Major Barnes’ representations took this trenchant form, but his views
eventually prevailed, and a truce was proclaimed.

[Sidenote: _February, 1916_]

On the 1st February the Battalion took over fatigue duties from the
9th Inniskilling Fusiliers. These duties were carried out under
the direction of the 112th (Railway) Company, R.E., and consisted
in constructing a light railway stretching between Candas and
Puckevillers. It was hard work, but interesting and not unpleasant.
Each day the working parties went out to railhead, which daily
extended, taking their mid-day meal with them, and returning to billets
at the close of the day’s work. The billets were good, the amenities
fair, and existence supportable during those halcyon days. Further
serious demands on our already lamentably depleted Roll of Officers
had now to be met when orders were received for Major Barnes to be
attached to G.H.Q. for special duty and for Captain Barratt to proceed
to England for munition work. This continued attrition could not in
the nature of things conduce to the efficiency and contentment of the
Battalion, which now bore visible evidence of these changes, and it is
a tribute to the Battalion’s innate qualities that these involuntary
departures had no lasting ill effects.

This pleasant interlude lasted for a fortnight, when once again rumours
of change filled the air. These duly materialised, and on the 15th the
Battalion left Candas at 9.30 a.m. and marched to Thieures, a distance
of 11 miles, arriving at 1.30 p.m. after a good march, the weather
being in our favour. There we went into billets for the night. Leaving
Thieures at 9 a.m. on the following morning we set out on the most
villainous march it is possible to imagine. The weather was appalling,
with continuous storms of rain accompanied by a gale, and it was a
limp and sorry crowd that hobbled into Sombrin at 2 p.m. and dissolved
from view into billets already prepared to dry itself to the best
of the means available. No further moves being contemplated for the
present we settled down for some days, these being devoted to Battalion
training. Sergeant Adamson was detached to Brigade Headquarters as
Instructor at the Brigade Bombing School. Lieut.-Colonel Carleton took
over temporary command of the 164th Brigade and the command of the
Battalion consequently devolved on Captain J. Caddy. Training continued
but was much interfered with by the weather. It was very cold with
heavy snow and frost, the roads being in very bad condition. At 3 p.m.
the Battalion left Sombrin and moved to Monchiet, only a matter of six
miles, but another awful march, due to causes different in character
to the last march, but even more trying in their effects. It blew a
blizzard and was very cold. The roads were in bad order, very tiring
for the men, and nearly impossible for the transport. Lieut. Neill had
a terrible time, but eventually got his transport through. We passed
other transport hopelessly ditched and during the night sent parties
back to help them out of their difficulties. The snow was quite deep.
At Monchiet there joined us a taciturn youth who on introduction,
emerged as Lieut. Wilson, R.A.M.C., who remained with us as _locum
tenens_ for Lieut. Gatchell, our Medical Officer, who was now on
leave. Lieut. Wilson was to join us permanently at a later date and
loom large in the life of the Battalion--but that is anticipating. At 5
p.m. on the 26th February we left Monchiet and marched to the trenches,
relieving the 10th Liverpool Scottish in the Blamont and Ravine
trenches in front of Bretencourt.

The area in which we now found ourselves formed a portion of the large
re-entrant of which the tortured city of Arras was the apex. The lines
of trenches fell away from Arras, in a north-westerly direction towards
Aubigny and Loos, and in a south-westerly direction towards Blairville
and beyond. A great national highway ran arrow-straight from Doullens
to Arras, and in moving from Sombrin and Monchiet on the north the
Battalion had to cross this highway on its way to the trenches,
situated about ten miles to the south-west of Arras. After crossing
this highway the land dipped sharply to the village below. The upper
portion, being in view of the enemy and subject to his attentions,
was traversed by a communication trench which it were well to utilise
in daylight. The village, lying snugly at the lower end of this
communication trench, rejoiced in at least two names, if not three.
Officially it was known as Bretencourt, but was equally well known
as Rivière. It was only about a mile from the line, but many of its
inhabitants still clung on to their possessions. Owing to its peculiar
position it was comparatively safe, but was subject to high angle fire
at times, especially from machine guns. Leaving the village the route
rose sharply, past the White Chateau occupied by Brigade Headquarters,
and so to the last communication trench. This leads to “The Quarry,” a
ready-made shelter, where Battalion Headquarters and the First Field
Dressing Station are located, thence to the front line.

The Battalion held the right sub-sector of the 164th Brigade front,
with the 166th Brigade on the right and 165th Brigade on the left.
In front was Blairville in German hands. Intervening, and extending
for some 200 yards was No Man’s Land, in the middle of which was a
considerable clump of osiers, in which patrols from both sides were
wont to indulge in grim little games of hide and seek.

The enemy was quiet. It was still snowing hard and the trenches were
in a very bad state owing to the thaw which had set in. All available
men were set to work but this seemed to have very little effect.
Material was scarce, and with more snow falling things were serious.
Work was incessant and by the 29th there was a little improvement. A
few whizz-bangs were sent over by the enemy on the 1st March but did no
damage.

Major-General Jeudwine, Commanding 55th Division visited the trenches
and was well pleased with the work done by the Battalion. On the 2nd
we were relieved by the 8th Liverpool (Irish) and marched back to
Monchiet. It was a poor march, the men being fatigued after incessant
work and bad weather in the trenches. We rested the following day,
occupying the time in much-needed cleaning of equipment. Snow commenced
to fall at 8 p.m. and continued all through the night. This lay to a
great depth next morning and the Battalion was engaged in clearing the
roads round Monchiet, working on the Gouy-Beaumetz and Doullens-Arras
roads. Second-Lieut. Bowman and 7 O.R. proceeded to Wisques for a Lewis
Gun Course. Next morning broke very fine and many aeroplanes were
about. The roads were in bad condition and the day was again devoted
to their improvement. On the 8th we marched back to the trenches and
relieved the 8th Liverpools. The trenches were again very bad and much
work had to be done. The evening was quiet but there was some little
sniping on the 13th and Company Sergeant-Major Gendle was fatally
wounded. On the 16th we went into Brigade Reserve in Bretencourt
village. Second-Lieuts. James Fisher, Keller and Hodkinson here
rejoined us, the latter from the Base Hospital after his rough-riding
mishap at Longpré. Second-Lieuts. Ferns, Thorpe, Lees and McClinton
and 43 other ranks also joined. Lieut. H. A. Brocklebank proceeded on
leave, and Lieut. W. C. Neill acted as Adjutant.

[Sidenote: _Mch.–Apl.–May, 1916_]

For the next three months we remained under these conditions, and in
the same area. From the Blamont trenches to billets, these alternating
between Monchiet, Bretencourt and finally Simoncourt, the transport
having for some time been located at the latter village.

[Sidenote: _June, 1916_]

It would be churlish to leave Bretencourt and not mention its popular
and prosperous estaminet, the Maison des Glaces, the Glass House,
admirably managed by three sisters, Marie, Irene and Adele (or was
it Eugenie?). It is ungallant to be remiss with mademoiselle’s name,
but more than one could assist as an _aide memoire_. One of our
young Officers was her _beau cavalier_, and it was a melting
sight to see the tender passages between the two. “Monsieur le
Bosche” was the somewhat startling endearment applied to our gallant,
probably accounted for by the fact that he wore glasses. Alas,
Mademoiselle would be distrait when she learnt that her impetuous
admirer, headstrong and bold as ever, was so soon to make the supreme
sacrifice. The interludes were good, the atmosphere genial, and the
wines above reproach. The weather had vastly improved and we were now
free from that portion of our troubles. The enemy, and ourselves, were
usually quiet, operations being confined to reconnoitring patrols.
Reconnoitring on our part had indeed become the standard pastime,
and many were the ghostly forays around the Osier Bed, to the wire
beyond. These forays were aided and abetted, indeed led by the C.O.
Whatever the wisdom of his personal indulgence as a _shikari_,
Col. Carleton’s practice coincided with his precepts. Emulation was
soon forthcoming and Lieut. Clarke emerged as the principal Battalion
fire-eater. It became recognised later that no raiding party was
complete without Capt. “Jat” Clarke and the incomparable Private
“Jerry” Holmes. This taking of gratuitous risks by Col. Carleton was
not confined to No Man’s Land. From billets in Bretencourt he was
wont to canter, attended by Capt. Caddy, out to morning exercise on
the sloping field already referred to, through which wound the first
communication trench. This was admirably adapted in normal times for
putting a blood mare through her beautiful paces, a charming spectacle,
and one which may have appealed to the Germans in whose view it was,
for they refrained from using it as a target. One of this remarkable
man’s recipes for successful campaigning was the importance of small
things. The Headquarters Mess became transformed under his tutelage
and received the admiring soubriquet “The Quarry Grill.” For some time
it had been clear that we were not to have his services for long,
and on the 12th Col. Carleton left to take over Command of the 98th
Infantry Brigade, Major G. B. Balfour taking temporary command of the
Battalion. On this date, too, Major-General Jeudwine, Commanding 55th
Division, made a most thorough inspection of the Battalion.

[Sidenote: _June–July, 1916._]

Talk of impending big events filled the air. We were intrigued by the
arrival of new drafts of Officers and men, and we looked amongst these
for new faces from the Furness District but these were becoming fewer.
Soon we were up to establishment, an unprecedented achievement for us.
Stores of all kinds became more plentiful, and were easier to replace
when lost or damaged, and there was a general air of expectancy. On
the 19th the Battalion left billets at Simoncourt and marched via
Berneville, Warlazel and Dainville Achicourt, to the trenches at Agny,
and relieved the 6th D.C.L.I. These trenches were situated a few miles
to the north-east of Blamont and about four miles south-west of Arras.
The prevailing unrest seemed to have permeated the Hun, and there was
much trench activity and some casualties on our side. Amongst these,
unfortunately, were Second-Lieut. Johnstone and three other ranks on
patrol duty wounded by our own outposts. This Officer had previously
captured two Germans from a German patrol.

On the 25th Major J. L. Swainson, D.S.O., a regular Officer of the
D.C.L.I. arrived and took over Command of the Battalion. On the 12th
July we were relieved by the Liverpool Scottish and marched to Barly,
where for four days the Battalion underwent training with a view to an
offensive. On the 16th we took over Blamont trenches once more, and
on the 20th left Bretencourt for the last time, being relieved by a
Battalion of the Northumberland Fusiliers, and marched to Simoncourt.




                              CHAPTER V.

                              THE SOMME.


[Sidenote: _July, 1916_]

Kits were now reduced to the required minimum. Surplus kit was stacked
and laid aside--with confidence this time that they would be available
on the return of less hectic times. G.S. wagons were laden and limbers
filled up to their limit, and the Battalion started off on another
pilgrimage, its ultimate destination as yet unknown, but only one
conclusion could be drawn from the thorough examination of equipment,
and the issue of trench maps delineating the battle-front of the Somme.
We made Sombrin on the first day after a tiring and dusty march. On the
22nd July the personnel of the Battalion were conveyed by motor bus to
Berneuil, the transport moving independently by road. Here we practised
the attack by sectional rushes. Before daylight had set in on the 25th
the Battalion was on the march, shaping its course through Fienvillers
to Candas where other troops, battle-stained and cheerful, laughed
at us through the mud and filth which days of incessant fighting had
imprinted on their faces. It was the first visible sign of the great
offensive.

We entrained at Candas and crawled slowly away past Montrelet and
St. Ouen, following the beautiful valley of the Nievre. Optimistic
chatterers maintained that we were now pursuing a course directly
opposite to that which ought to take us to the front. They did not
know, however, that this branch line united with the main railroad
from Abbeville to Albért. And the crossing of the viaduct over the
Somme marshes soon brought us to the trunk line leading to the heart
of hostilities. To our disappointment the train passed through the
fine station of Amiens without stopping, the market gardens slipped
by, the little vignettes of Senegalese troops became a blur, Corbie of
old acquaintance faded from view, and at 2 o’clock we steamed into
railhead, Méricourt-Ribemont.

Those of us who had known Méricourt of old were amazed at the change.
Then it had been a sleepy little station with a few sidings and a tent
or two for the accommodation of prospective _permissionaires_. Now
it was the busy centre of all the traffic in men and material feeding
the firing line in the sector of Albért. Immense stores of provisions
and endless piles of ammunition lay stacked ready for transport. German
prisoners, mostly unshaven, were engaged in road mending, or were
lazily watching the new troops. Under a blazing sun we marched out of
the station. Buire-sur-Ancre showed unmistakable signs of activity.
Tired men were dragging themselves along the hot, dusty road, traces
of recent fighting plain upon their faces. A few attempted to smile.
Sweat ran down and grooved the dirt upon their foreheads and cheeks.
Many lacked full equipment. Battalions came out under the command of
subalterns, careworn and ageing. Limbers and wagons were rushing up
towards the line with food for the men and ammunition for the guns. In
happy contrast to the stricken remnants returning from battle were our
fresh troops pouring in as reinforcements.

From Méricourt we marched to Méaulte, near Albért, where the Town Major
had a particularly trying experience in accommodating Battalion after
Battalion in a very restricted area. Confusion at such a time and
place, however, was unavoidable. We now formed part of the 13th Corps,
Fourth Army. On the 26th we marched to Happy Valley, a comparatively
quiet backwater, and took over bivouacs from a Battalion of the 8th
Brigade, 3rd Division. Here four days were spent in training under
Company arrangements, including much-needed bathing parades to
Bray-sur-Somme. There was also an overdue presentation of decorations
by Brigadier-General Edwards. There had been a good many individual
exploits, thoroughly meriting recognition, and, indeed, recommended for
such, which were met with disapproval by the authorities on the ground
that the time was “inopportune,” and it was not until many more months
had passed that decorations began to flow with more facility. An enemy
aeroplane dropped bombs on the valley, but there were no casualties
amongst our men.

On the night of 30th/31st July the Battalion marched north and took
over trenches on a line running north and south between Trones Wood
and Guillemont, relieving remnants of the 30th Division. In taking up
position we were heavily shelled, losing Second-Lieut. Lincey and three
other ranks killed and twelve wounded. Our artillery bombarded heavily
all day, and we spent the day digging in, including a shallow German
trench in their old line. The immensity of the push was now apparent to
us, and our eyes opened in astonishment at the awful havoc of the guns.
We, who had seen over twelve months’ service, astonished! A giant of
steel seemed to have ridden over the proud German defences. Villages
were wiped completely out of existence--Fricourt, Mametz, Carnoy,
Maricourt, Montauban, all a tumbled heap of rubble; woods were laid
waste. Saddest of all there was not a blade of green grass visible.
Trenches were everywhere blown out of recognition. In every direction
disused gun pits with piles of empty shell cases showed how the
artillery had advanced. Disrupted sandbags littered the broken earth. A
poignant reminder that victory is not purchased without cost lay in the
newly-delved earth, where blue flags were fluttering over the dead.

The transport lay in bivouac in what had been German lines between
Fricourt and Maricourt. From this point of vantage much of the terrible
drama was visible. Not an inch of ground but was covered by war
material and troops resting. Mametz Road presented an unparalleled
scene of activity. Never for an instant was it idle. There were
up-roads and down-roads everywhere. Ammunition, food, guns went up the
one in constant streams; wounded and fatigued men, empty ammunition and
ration limbers, came rolling back on the other. Whenever any portion
of the road showed signs of wear, either by shell fire or natural
attrition, gangs of men from labour battalions set to work, metalling
and restoring. These men were nearly all over age. They had none of the
hot glory of conflict. To them fell no stirring battle honours. Yet who
but must admire the spirit that sent these gallant veterans into the
zone of shell fire.

The view of the fighting from the actual front was, of necessity,
local. But here a much broader outlook was possible. Looking down
Mametz valley--“Death Valley” as it was colloquially known--towards
Montauban on the left and Trones Wood on the right centre, a mile
away, the immense superiority of our guns in the first place struck
the observer. The guns were everywhere, “ubique” indeed. They were
literally wheel to wheel. Recalling those dark days of 1915, when we
asked for support, and asked in vain, it made one’s heart rejoice, with
a strange exultation to see those inexhaustible stacks of shells and to
hear the incessant roaring of the guns.

And then one could not fail to be impressed with our mastery of the
air. How effectively the enemy had been blinded became daily more
obvious. The hum of aircraft rung in the ears as the guns slackened.
All day long the droning battleplane wheeled over the scene of carnage.
Reconnoitring planes flew backwards and forwards with information
of enemy masses, train movements and gun positions. The more humble
contact planes hung a few hundred feet over the advancing troops and
reported progress to the artillery. They flew unperturbed over the
avalanche of our own shells. Whenever an objective was attained by our
infantry coloured flares ascended and the contact aeroplane immediately
conveyed the intelligence to the gunners, who lengthened their range
and prepared the ground for further advance.

Not only in aeroplanes were we seemingly supreme. Observational work by
aircraft was necessarily hasty and brief. It was the captive balloon
that supplied the more detailed and continuous information. These
balloons were connected to earth by telephone. As many as twenty-five
could be counted swinging lazily in the breeze. Indeed, the increasing
salient of our battle-front, as we bit deeper and deeper into the
German defences, could be gauged by the wide crescent of these aerial
outposts.

Not only above, but underneath, had this amazing tornado passed. Our
human moles had burrowed with an uncanny sense of direction right
underneath those ingeniously contrived German subterranean passages.
They had prepared--with an immense amount of patience, self-sacrifice
and danger, daring not only detection by the enemy, but the far more
insidious peril of poison gas--mines beside which those at La Boisselle
shrunk into pettiness. And then, in a moment, by the mere pressure of
an electric button, in a mighty convulsion they had overwhelmed all
those galleries and caverns where the enemy was cowering under the
avalanche of our shells.

“Death Valley” then was now the centre of this hellish activity.
Blinded as they were the Germans poured a prodigal amount of ammunition
into it, and they had their own old positions ranged to a nicety.
And it is easy to understand how effective such a mass of fire could
be, when this was the only avenue by which rations could be brought
up to the infantry or ammunition for the guns. One would see a G.S.
waggon, pair of horses and driver, careering down this Satanic road
with ammunition, a stray shell, and blankness--nothing to mark the
event but an additional shell-hole, which the devoted labour corps
hurried out like solicitous ants to investigate and repair. In spite
of the frightful punishment the enemy were undergoing at our hands,
inaction could never be laid to their charge. Each day saw their
defences, so seriously threatened, grow more formidable. Their pioneers
were tireless. Their “Betontruppen,” specialists in the erection of
concrete machine gun emplacements, or “strong points,” and their
“Hollenbankommandos,” for the construction of dugouts, were organizing
a newly-formed system of trenches on a scale of great magnitude, and
with the invaluable accessories of strong points. Trenches, wired and
traversed, emerged in a single night. The favourable features of the
ground were everywhere transformed into miniature fortresses of amazing
strength, from whose loop-holed bastions machine guns in countless
numbers pushed their deadly muzzles.

[Sidenote: _August, 1916_]

The sector of trenches occupied by us lay on the extreme right of
the British position, before Guillemont. On our right were the 156th
Regiment of Infantry, 10th Corps, French Army, and on our left the 8th
Liverpools. Guillemont was marked for early attack, but the time was
not yet. Artillery activity on both sides was continuous. The enemy
appeared to be nervous. At 8.30 p.m. on 1st August “B” Company attacked
an advanced German strong point with one platoon. This platoon was hung
up and forced to retire, owing to enemy barrage, which was very severe.
At 8.45 p.m. another platoon went forward under Second-Lieut. A. J.
Brockman and was completely successful. We had previously dislodged the
enemy with Stokes Mortar bombs, and as they were retreating in large
numbers (apparently the enemy was massing for an attack) our artillery
barrage caught them and inflicted very severe casualties on them. Our
casualties were slight, Second-Lieut. Rudduck being wounded. In this
brisk encounter communication by telephone lasted for exactly an hour
under a most severe and accurate enemy shelling. In the early morning
of 3rd August the Battalion was relieved by the 4th Loyals and moved
into Brigade Reserve, in Dublin and Casement trenches, in front of
Maricourt, that is, to the rear of the Mametz valley.

[Sidenote: _August, 1916_]

The enemy shelled the left of our trenches but did not cause any
damage. We found some fatigue parties, including two for the front
line. On the night of the 4th we were relieved by the 5th Liverpools,
of the 165th Brigade, and proceeded to bivouacs south of Carnoy and
west of Bronfay Farm. The weather was very hot and the next three days
were spent quietly with bayonet fighting, physical drill and bathing
parades. At 6 p.m. on the 7th sudden orders were received, and at 8.15
p.m. the Battalion left bivouacs and proceeded to trenches near Arrow
Head Copse, in sector south of Trones Wood and Guillemont Road. There
was an awful congestion of troops in the Sunken Road, but, fortunately,
no shelling, and the Battalion did not have a single casualty during
the relief, which was completed by 1 a.m., when preparations were made
for the attack on Guillemont.

The order of battle from right to left was “D,” “A,” “B” and “C”
Companies. At 3.45 a.m. on 8th August the first line, consisting of two
platoons of each Company, crept out in front of the advanced trench,
at the same time the remainder of the Battalion occupied the advanced
trench. At 4.10 the first line advanced a short way and waited four
minutes. Second line left the trench and took up a position twenty
yards in rear of the first line. The second line was closely followed
by two platoons of the 4th Loyals as carrying party. At 4.15 the enemy
placed a very violent barrage of artillery fire (shrapnel) on the
fire trench. The first and second lines crept forward closer to our
own barrage to escape enemy fire. At 4.20 the Battalion went forward
again and the first line immediately came under heavy bomb fire. This
was absolutely unexpected, caused heavy casualties, and the attack was
arrested. The enemy then opened very heavy machine gun and rifle fire,
which caught the second line as it came up to reinforce the first line.

Further advance being impossible, owing to uncut wire, the Battalion
retired out of bombing distance from the German trench and started to
dig in, fifty yards in front of our original trench. These operations
occupied twenty minutes. The enemy maintained a very heavy barrage
of shrapnel on the Sunken Road during the whole of this time. The
only means of communication during this time, with the exception of
one Company, to which the telephone wire was intact, was by runner.
Communication with the Battalion on the left was completely lost. It
was ascertained that this Battalion was reported to be in the village
of Guillemont, and it was intended to make an attempt to get into touch
with their right. Stokes Mortars were brought up and were ordered
to destroy the barricade on the Sunken Road leading to Guillemont,
with the idea of attacking and taking this point and which would have
enabled an advance on the left to be covered. There was a great deal
of delay in bringing up the Stokes Mortar ammunition, the difficulties
of communication were great, and it made it extremely hard for orders
to reach their destination. This delay gave the enemy a long period of
rest, which was unfavourable to the success of any further enterprise.

The Stokes Mortars bombarded the barricade, but were not successful in
damaging it. It was intended that a bombing party should assault at 12
noon, but the situation was seen to be quite hopeless for the success
of such an enterprise.

Our artillery, in the meantime, kept up an intermittent bombardment for
a long period. They were firing very short and our front line had to be
cleared. It was with the greatest difficulty that the artillery were
informed of this, which caused some casualties to the Battalion. It
was decided that any further attack was impracticable and efforts were
concentrated on improving the present position as far as possible and
to render it easily defensible in the event of any hostile offensive.
The Battalion was by this time greatly reduced in numbers and was also
fatigued by the strain of the heavy fighting. There was a shortage of
Officers. It was not known what had happened to the Battalion on the
left, and although all effort was made to ascertain their position
no information was obtainable. It was impossible to obtain accurate
information, which made the situation worse. The remainder of the night
was spent in trying to collect wounded, improve our original position,
and clear the battlefield. At 3.55 a.m. on the 9th we were relieved by
the 10th Liverpool Scottish and proceeded, sorely stricken and almost
unmanned by the terrific strain of the recent fighting and the shambles
around us, to bivouac south-west of Carnoy.

The Battalion arrived in small parties. Stragglers came in during the
day. Captain Huthwaite, of the charmed life, wandering about like a
distracted shepherd looking for his flock, collected a number of these
and brought them in. A roll call was made with lamentable results,
disclosing eight Officers killed, including the Commanding Officer, and
nine wounded; 254 other ranks, including 48 killed and 206 wounded and
missing. The Officers were:--


                               _Killed._

    Lieut.-Col. J. L. Swainson, D.S.O.
    Capt. R. D’A. Morrell.
    Capt. A. A. Wright.
    2nd-Lt. Hodkinson.
    2nd-Lt. Brockman.
    2nd-Lt. Lawson.
    2nd-Lt. L. Metcalf.
    2nd-Lt. Hilton.


                              _Wounded._

    Capt. Neill.
    2nd-Lt. Welch.
    2nd-Lt. Ferns.
    2nd-Lt. Withey.
    2nd-Lt. Clark.
    2nd-Lt. S. F. Walker.
    2nd-Lt. Wilcock.
    2nd-Lt. Jackson.
    2nd-Lt. Metcalfe.

The loss of the Commanding Officer was a stunning blow. Although he had
only been with us six weeks his influence on the Battalion was marked
and beneficent. We found ourselves guided by a firm hand, directed with
understanding. It was not given to every regular Officer at that time
to see eye to eye with the aspirations and latent qualities of the
Territorial Army. Captain Jackson, our late Adjutant, had possessed
this rare faculty and was ready to admit and proclaim that in some
essential military respects, of which trench-digging was only one, the
Territorial Army could more than hold its own. Colonel Swainson was
another with this gift of insight, and with his regular experience, his
knowledge of what to do, and perhaps more important, what not to do,
the Battalion seemed set for a period of what can best be termed happy
soldiering, when he met his untimely end. The Command now devolved
upon Major G. B. Balfour.

For many days no recollection of these horrors was permitted to
diminish the enthusiasm of the Division. Concerts were held nightly.
On the bare slopes near Carnoy the infantry, worn out by their recent
trials, engaged themselves in innocent relaxation.

The theatre party of the Division, under our own Lieut. Leslie,
addressed themselves to their congenial offices with a diligence no
less justified of the times than it was deserving of support. Blood
had freely flowed and would flow again as freely. In the meantime no
dejection of spirits must be allowed to usurp the place of contentment
and good cheer. The guns were still ranged solidly against the
enemy and pulverising his trenches. His own artillery, admittedly
well-handled, was redoubling its opposition. More and more troops,
eager to win renown, and excited by the unwonted activity, were pouring
up towards the line. Defeated and despairing, the Germans, stung to a
paroxysm of frenzy, were hurling themselves on their lost positions.
Forfeitures of ground, privations unproclaimed, renunciation of hope,
submission and subjugation--all these things they had been taught to
abhor. And now, as we forced them to accept adversity, they resisted
with fierce courage.

The weather continued very hot. On the following day the remnants of
the Battalion paraded by companies for inspection, re-organisation and
checking deficiencies in equipment. Major-General Jeudwine, commanding
the Division, inspected us and cheered us by his very austerity. A
working party of one Officer and 70 other ranks went into the front
line to dig forward communication trenches. They were heavily shelled
by enemy artillery but only two casualties were caused. We observed one
of our forward trench balloons break away from its moorings and sail
away over the enemy lines. The occupant was equal to the occasion and
got out of his difficulties by the aid of a parachute. On the 14th we
left bivouacs at Carnoy and marched to Méricourt with the Brigade,
via Sand Pit, Meaulte, Ville-sur-Ancre Treux, the transport travelling
under Brigade arrangements via Bray-sur-Somme.

The Battalion rested in billets in Méricourt, the time being spent in
refitting, re-organisation and steady drill. Bathing, too, received
attention, the weather being still very hot. A draft of 100 other ranks
from the 3/10th Manchester Regiment joined us and proved a good lot
of men. For the present the Division was not to be re-engaged on the
Somme, and at 4 a.m. on the 19th the Battalion paraded at Méricourt
Station and entrained for Abbeville, arriving at 11.30 a.m. Time did
not admit of the hoped-for coffee and omelette at the “Bull’s Head,”
and at 11.40 we were off again on the march, over the bridge leading to
the south side of the Somme, through Rouvroy and Cambron, until at 4
p.m. we arrived in billets at Lambercourt.

We shall never forget that sweet corner of France. The fresh profusion
of green grass and yellow stubble, the prodigal wealth and variety of
arboreal treasures with abundant foliage, fruit trees laden with their
gracious burden. The scattered houses of the village, nestling within
bowers of roses and other sweet-smelling flowers, a thin blue reek
ascending from some chimney in a thatched roof. Sharply and suddenly
contrasted with the din and horror we had left so recently these quiet
scenes brought tears to the eyes and a sense of realisation that a
beneficent Power was still in charge of human destiny.

A cavalry regiment had been dislodged in order that the P.B.I. might
have a fleeting respite in this corner of paradise. Whence they had
departed was a matter of conjecture, probably to another delectable
billet, as their turn had not yet come in the maelstrom. For ten days
the Battalion enjoyed the seclusion of this peaceful retreat. The time
was given over to platoon training, whilst drafts of reinforcements
continued to arrive. On the 23rd all Officers and N.C.O.’s attended
a lecture at Brigade Headquarters, given by General Jeudwine, on the
recent operations. A pleasing feature at this time was the special
short leave granted to small parties to St. Valery-sur-Somme and
Tréport. These were delightful little watering-places on the estuary of
the Somme, and it was whispered that the delights of a casino awaited
visitors to either place. Plans were in preparation to extend these
privileges to Paris, when the bolt fell from the blue and the Battalion
again turned its face to the east.

[Sidenote: _Aug.–Sept., 1916_]

At 11.15 p.m. on August 29th we left Lambercourt in light marching
order, the men’s packs having been despatched separately by
motor lorry, and marched via Cambron, Rouvroy, St. Marguerite, Mareuil,
Bray-les-Mareuil and Duncq to Pont Remy, where we arrived at 5 a.m. and
had breakfast. Entraining and leaving Pont Remy at 8 o’clock we passed
through Amiens and Corbie and arrived at Méricourt-Ribemont at 11.40
a.m., on the inner edge of hostilities once more. The Battalion moved
to a point adjoining the main Albert-Corbie road where billets in tents
and hutments awaited us. The weather was now unfavourable. Ten Officer
reinforcements joined from the base. Battalion training occupied us
during our stay in billets, and at midnight on September 7th we moved
into trenches in Montauban Alley, where we were in Brigade reserve,
relieving the 1st South Staffords. On the 10th the Battalion moved
up and helped to man our front line trenches in Delville Wood, after
the failure of a previous attack. Here the Companies were all split
up and it was difficult to acquire accurate information. At 6 p.m.
orders were received from Brigade to carry out an attack by surprise
at 5.15 a.m. on to Hop Alley and German trenches on the western side
of Delville Wood. This attack was duly carried out with “D” Company
on left flank, “A” and “B” Companies in the centre, and “C” Company
on the right. All ranks were dead tired and there was no dash in the
attack, which failed directly the Germans opened with machine gun and
rifle fire. Our casualties in this encounter were not very heavy, but
Lieut. E. Spearing, commanding “D” Company, and Second-Lieut. G. R.
Glenie, Lewis Gun Officer, were both missing and were later found to
have been killed in action. The remainder of the 11th and 12th was
spent in holding the front line, which was heavily shelled, causing
heavy casualties. We were relieved by the 8th King’s Royal Rifles and
returned to bivouac at Becourt.

[Sidenote: _September, 1916_]

On the 13th the Battalion marched to Ribemont and bivouacked in
canvas shelters. Four officers reported here for duty, including
Captain R. Gardner, who rejoined the Battalion on recovery from his
unlucky adventure with a Very light some months previously, and
Second-Lieut. T. H. Middleton, having been appointed to a commission
from Sergeant-Signaller. From Ribemont to Buire, where we found
comfortable billets for both officers and men, and where we saw 850
German prisoners being marched to the rear. The 17th, being Sunday, we
attended a Brigade Church Parade, when the Padre’s sermon was based on
St. Peter “warming himself at the fire,” with personal reminiscences
of training in England during the early days of the war. From Buire to
Becordel, where we went into bivouacs in drenching rain near Mametz
prisoners’ camp.

The new bivouacs were devoid of any comfort whatsoever. A few shelters
were improvised for the night, but very few enjoyed satisfactory
shelter. Funkholes were dug at irregular intervals, in case the enemy
opened artillery fire. In the murky and rainy night, when men arrived
in driblets from heavy working parties, covered with mud from head to
foot, limping with fatigue, and hungry as only men are hungry when much
strenuous labour is required, there were often no means of showing
these poor wretches the many pitfalls that lay in their path. Stumbling
over the tangle of brushwood and falling into the soft oozy mud lining
the bottom of the funkholes, I have heard them groping blindly for
shelter, swearing roundly at everything. But I have never failed to
hear them _sing_ when, under equal conditions, they have found a
few inches of tarpaulin ready to shield them from the bitter cold, or a
scattering of straw to serve as their pallet. One is apt to grumble at
home over little things. Let him not grumble till he has passed a night
under such conditions as these.

Our front line had advanced considerably, and the next area of
operations was Longueval and Flers, well in front of Delville Wood.
After Holy Communion on the 24th the Battalion proceeded to occupy
reserve trenches known as Green Trench and King’s Walk. Officers
reconnoitred the lines of approach to Flers, and Second-Lieut. Beazley
was wounded. Our bombardment developed in severity, and on the 26th
orders were received to move forward, three platoons to strong points
at the end of Cove Alley and one company and one platoon to Smoke
Trench, while Battalion Headquarters moved up to east of Flers.

On the 27th the 55th Division resumed active operations. The 8th
Liverpool Irish were detailed to assault and capture Gird and Gird
Support trenches, and the 4th King’s Own to furnish the fifth wave
in attack. Parties carried R.E. material for making strong points
to Grove Alley and Gird Support trenches. The trench was easily
captured by the 8th Liverpools, and the carrying parties carried out
their duties successfully and without casualties. These parties then
occupied a position on Factory Corner--Gueudecourt Road, keeping in
touch on the left with the 4th King’s Own. Arrangements were made
later to relieve the 8th Liverpool Irish in the captured trenches.
Several casualties were sustained in a bombardment subsequent to the
attack. At 2 a.m. on the 28th the 4th King’s Own took over Gird and
Gird Support trenches from the 8th Liverpools. The trenches were
heavily bombarded during the day by the enemy. Three patrols with
Lewis guns were sent out to locate the German position and harass a
working party which had been seen earlier in the morning. At 2 a.m.
on the 29th the Battalion was relieved in the trenches by the Royal
West Surreys and re-assembled at Mametz, where a _contretemps_
all but ended in minor disaster. The Quartermaster had been handed
over a paragon of bivouacs in the form of tents, one of the best we
had experienced, and was keeping watch and ward over this treasure,
when he was horrified to see a battalion of New Zealanders descend
upon him like the Assyrians of old, or the plague of locusts, and take
possession. Protests from a mere Quartermaster of Infantry were met
with airy nonchalance. Other and prompt steps had to be taken. Olivette
was saddled and made short work of the journey to Brigade Headquarters,
where a sympathetic Staff Captain got busy, wires were set sizzling,
and the anxious Quartermaster eventually had the satisfaction of seeing
these unconventional soldiers march out of one end of the camp as his
precious Battalion hobbled in at the other, happily unconscious of
their narrow escape from homelessness. We moved thence to very crowded
billets in Dernacourt.

This was to be the close of our memorable association with the Somme,
for the present, at any rate. The approach of winter placed an
insuperable barrier on hopes of much further advance. Progress had been
definite, if it had not met the most sanguine expectations, but the
courageous tenacity and marvellous organization of the enemy revealed
the magnitude of the task yet to be completed.




                              CHAPTER VI.

                                YPRES.


[Sidenote: _October, 1916_]

For the present we were not to be re-engaged upon the Somme, but,
transported to Longpré, were moved into quarters for the night of
October 1st at Bouchon. The following day we entrained at Longpré and
moved to the north. In the early afternoon we passed through Abbeville.
The tented dunes of Etaples swarmed with reinforcements. As darkness
descended we entered the region of the flats of Flanders. The coast
line receded. Boulogne and Calais were left far behind. St. Omer and
Hazebrouck were before us. Soon these, too, were swallowed up in the
night. At midnight we detrained at Hopoutre and marched away. As dawn
was breaking officers and men threw themselves down to snatch a little
sleep in billets already provided at Poperinghe, ten miles west of
Ypres. From here, after bathing parade, the Battalion marched to “O”
Camp, a few miles nearer Ypres and just off the main Poperinghe-Ypres
road. This camp consisted of the usual pattern army huts, nearly new,
and, being weather proof, provided excellent accommodation, and were
much appreciated by the men after their rough experiences of the past
two months.

This, then, was our first introduction to the Ypres salient. Many times
in the early days we had hovered on its brink, and it seemed strange
that we should be only now making its close acquaintance, eighteen
months afterwards. Although we felt ourselves a little disappointed
with our renewed acquaintance with the Flemish fogs and flats, we
gradually adapted ourselves to the changed conditions. A year had made
a vast difference in our powers of appreciation. Casting back to those
grim days of Festubert there stood out in bold relief pools rotting
with dead, trenches constructionally weak, and an enemy gunnery the
mastery of which was denied us for many a long day to come. But the
passing of twelve months had shown us, week by week, such striking
improvements that there was now no limit to our confidence. All these
things reacted favourably on our outlook. Our fickle minds recalled
only the monotony of the rolling Picard uplands. They were now touched
by the vision of a new beauty.

For ten days the Battalion enjoyed immunity from the strain of
exacting work. The usual parades were held to preserve discipline and
efficiency. After the routine of daily parades and inspections it was
customary for a few of us to ride or cycle into Poperinghe, about six
kilometres distant. Poperinghe was the point of convergence for the
military in the Ypres salient, as Béthune was for the La Bassée sector,
Doullens for Arras, and Amiens for the Somme.

One of the first things to meet the eye was the prominence given
to “Gas Alarms.” A large notice was exhibited on a building in the
main square, where the road to Ypres left the town, which read “Wind
Dangerous” or “Wind Safe.” Otherwise its amenities bore comparison
with towns of greater pretensions. There was an attractive Officers’
Club, established in a spacious building named Talbot House, after its
founder, Colonel Talbot, of an ancient lineage and a staff officer.
Here resided the Padre, the Rev. “Tubby” Clayton, who afterwards was
to render Talbot House famous as the original home of its illustrious
offspring, “Toc H.” This club had the air of quiet decorum associated
with its kind, and it was held by the irreverent that any shell--from
which, alas, Poperinghe was not immune--from the German “Long Tom,”
more impetuous than its fellows and ill-advised enough to invade those
awful precincts, would shrivel to impotence in its frigid atmosphere.
This was, of course, uncharitable, but the painful fact must be
recorded that the younger element preferred the freer delights of
Skindle’s and Kiki’s, two restaurants whose air of gay animation made
an irresistible appeal to war-worn youth. Here the unheard of luxuries
of fresh fish and even oysters were included in a generous menu. These
arrived daily, we were informed, by canal from Dunkerque. Here also
was established the Divisional Concert Party, which had now attained
a high standard of efficiency in the exacting art of entertainment.
These played nightly as to the manner born to crowded audiences, whose
plaudits testified to the quality of the entertainment and their own
high spirits. One of these artists was a young imp of the 4th Loyals,
who made up in startling fashion as “Poppy Poperinghe.”

The appointment of Lieut.-Colonel G. B. Balfour to the command of
the Battalion, which he had held since the death of Lieut.-Colonel
Swainson, and that of Major H. A. Brocklebank as second-in-command,
was here confirmed. The appointment of Adjutant was vacant about this
time and was not filled permanently until Sergeant-Major J. Way was
commissioned and appointed on December 23rd, 1916. Lieut. Mudie held
the acting appointment for one period of the interim and probably
another officer, whose name does not emerge.

On the 13th the Battalion was inspected by Brigadier-General
Stockwell and was complimented on its turnout. The Brigadier took the
opportunity of presenting decorations and medals--the Military Cross
to Company Sergeant-Major R. A. Williams, the Distinguished Conduct
Medal to Private C. Milton, and Military Medals to Second-Lieut. T.
H. Middleton, Sergeants H. W. Percival and P. Stalker and Privates
W. Nicholson and H. Jackson. At 5.15 p.m. on the 14th we marched to
Brandhoek Station and entrained for Ypres, arriving at 7.30. Here we
went into quite good billets in the town--or what remained of it--some
in the ramparts and the remainder in the school.

Of all the ghostly and melancholy ruins along the western front Ypres
stands out almost unchallenged. Right from the beginning it had borne
the brunt of the enemy’s insensate fury, and withstood it. It still
stood four square to the foe and marked the eastern boundary of that
tiny strip of Belgium, still held by the gallant Belgian army on
our left and ourselves. The deplorable ruin of its once beautiful
structure bore evidence of the cost of its retention. The square and
its surrounding buildings, including the ancient and lovely Cloth Hall,
were a heap of powdered rubble, with here and there a stark stump of
wall and an arched window still surviving. These maimed remnants were
periodically repulverised by senseless bombardment by the enemy even
as a dog returns to its vomit. I have known no more eerie feeling than
that experienced when crossing this desolate square on a quiet night.
Many of the houses in the remoter suburbs were less damaged, and their
cellars made excellent shelters when the Hun carried out his frequent
bombardments of this martyred town. The civilian population had long
been evacuated.

The trench system was divided into two sectors, the left, or Potijze,
and the right, or Railway Wood. The latter was approached by way of the
Menin Gate and road, past the notorious Hell Fire Corner, and over the
railway connecting Ypres and Menin in normal times. The trenches were
fair and there were some good dugouts.

The communication trenches leading up to the front line, however,
left something to be desired. These were named West Lane and Mud Lane
(afterwards re-named Beek Trench, so as not to damage the morale of
reinforcements!).

On the right of this sub-sector were two or three craters left by
previous mine operations, and the width of these craters represented
the distance between the enemy and ourselves, who manned the opposite
lips. A deathly silence usually reigned at this point, the slightest
movement or sound being audible on either side.

Still further to the right the line was incomplete. A line of “grouse
butts” connected it with the Menin Road (the left-hand boundary of the
Division on our right). These “grouse butts” were not held during the
day but were occupied at night by Lewis Gun Sections and carefully
patrolled.

When visiting these posts one night Captain R. Gardner was “captured”
by the Division on the right and marched down to their Battalion Head
Quarters so that his identity might be established!

At 6.30 p.m. on the 15th the Battalion moved off by platoons and took
over trenches in the right sub-sector at Railway Wood. On our left
were the 8th Liverpool Irish and on our right the New Zealanders. The
trenches needed repair and there was not much rest for the Companies.
There was some activity by the enemy, who threw over many trench mortar
bombs. One of these made a direct hit on one of our cookhouses, killing
one man and wounding another. On the other hand our snipers reported
having bagged three Bosche. On the night of the 19th we were relieved
and marched back to our old billets in Ypres.

Twelve new officers, from the Lancashire Fusiliers, now joined
us--Captains F. H. Williamson and F. C. Slater and Lieuts. W. R.
Pattinson, G. Topham, J. H. Simpson, Second-Lieuts. C. W. Ford, J. C.
Alexander, R. A. Mudie, J. S. Patterson, R. Willett, J. Pearson and A.
T. Sheahan. Companies were reorganised--Captain Gardner to “A” Company,
Captain Slater “B,” Captain Huthwaite “C,” and Captain Williamson “D”
Company. Half the Battalion were moved into the prison along with
Battalion Headquarters. These billets were not bad, but cold. Working
parties were provided nightly for duty in the trenches. On the 23rd we
moved into trenches in the Potijze sector on the left. The weather was
bad and much labour was expended in pumping water out of the trenches
and in reveting. Everyone wore gum boots, water being over the duck
boards. The enemy was fairly quiet, but five of our men were hit by
shell fire.

The Brigadier was insistent upon repairs to trenches and to wire,
and upon obtaining command of No Man’s Land by constant patrolling.
Patrols visited the ruins of Oder House, situated between the lines,
and examined (from a respectful distance) a salient in the German lines
known as Kaiser Bill.

[Sidenote: _Nov.–Dec., 1916_]

On the 27th we were relieved and went back to billets in Ypres, moving
thence on the 30th to Elverdinghe, a little further to the rear,
where we found good billets for all, Battalion Headquarters being
accommodated in the chateau. Here a Defence Scheme was in operation,
and working parties were provided to maintain the trench system and
strong points, and test-manning of these points was carried out
periodically. Lieut.-Colonel G. B. Balfour went on leave and Major H.
A. Brocklebank took over temporary command. Captain H. Y. Huthwaite
reported sick and was transferred to England and later to the Indian
Army, greatly to the Battalion’s loss.

The campaign now took the form of monotonous routine, life alternating
between the many camps round Ypres--“C,” “D,” “O” and “P,” and quite
good they were.

When out of the line the Battalion found a great many working parties
for the laying of telephone cables from the Reserve Areas up to Ypres,
especially round Machine Gun Farm.

Ypres itself, with an occasional turn in the front line trenches at
Potijze, St. Julien and Railway Wood. The Higher Command were curious
to learn the composition and quality of the enemy in front, and for
some time a raiding party of the 4th King’s Own had been organising
and rehearsing a sudden descent on the enemy. These rehearsals were
very practical in their value. A replica, as far as possible, of the
enemy’s position to be raided was marked out by tapes on the practice
ground and times and distances were carefully noted. On December 21st
there was a full and final rehearsal at “O” Camp, and the raiding
party of 200, under Captain J. A. T. Clarke, were inspected by the
Commander-in-Chief, Sir Douglas Haig. On the evening of the 22nd the
raiders dined in the large hall of the Prison in Ypres, and at 1.30
a.m. on the 23rd they were armed and inspected prior to their departure
for the operation. With their faces and hands blacked to minimise
refraction of light and to facilitate recognition of their own side
during the actual raid, they looked a grim lot. The raiders commenced
to leave the Prison in small groups at 3.15 a.m. and journeyed to the
“jumping-off place,” a ditch running north and south in the St. Julien
sub-sector.

[Sidenote: _December, 1916_]

Their objective was to enter the German trenches and penetrate to the
Cameron support trench, with a view to killing or taking prisoners and
thus securing identification. At 5.25 a.m., under a very effective
artillery barrage, our men entered the enemy trenches according to plan
and penetrated as far as the support line. These trenches were very
badly knocked about by our barrage and, unfortunately, no prisoners
were taken and no identifications were obtained, the Bosche evidently
having abandoned his trenches when the bombardment commenced. Our
casualties were two officers, Second-Lieuts. Smith and Hart, wounded,
two other ranks killed, three missing, and thirty wounded. This was a
brisk and well carried out minor action, and if the main result was
disappointing, this was due to the discretion of the Hun and perhaps
defective preliminary action on our part. Registering and preliminary
bombardment having been carried out by us for a week the fact of the
raid had been effectively advertised. Surprise methods which were
adopted later were more successful. Sergeant M. Caddy was killed--a
good experienced N.C.O. and a loss to the Battalion.

We must not omit to devote a little space to the remarkable
personality of the Corps Commander. The ubiquity of General Sir Aylmer
Hunter-Weston was phenomenal. He was fond of touring the front line,
and on coming to a sentry post, to mark his estimate of the importance
of that duty, he would stand in front of the bewildered sentry, saying,
“I, your Corps Commander, salute you,” and, suiting the action to
the word, did actually give the sentry a most ceremonious salute. He
was keen on researches on the roofs of and behind cookhouses, while
at Battalion parade inspection he made men take off their boots, and
exposed officers’ ignorance of the “innards” of a water-cart. That
legend should gather round his name is not surprising. He was a fine
officer whose sterling work in France commenced with a Brigade in the
original British Expeditionary Force.

[Sidenote: _Jan.–Feb., 1917_]

Wintry weather of the severest description now gripped the land. Snow
was frequent and frost so intense that anything liquid was quickly
turned to ice. This condition persisted to the end of March, when there
was a welcome break.

The Division was relieved early in January, 1917, by the 39th Division.
The 165th and 166th Brigades went out at once, but the 164th Brigade,
to which we belonged, was kept back in Reserve in view of a possible
attack against the junction of the British and Belgian lines north of
Ypres; the enemy might raid over the frozen canal. It was bitterly cold
in the camps. There was much reconnoitring of the Elverdinghe defences
and of the approaches thence to the front line.

On February 3rd the Battalion left “D” Camp and marched by Companies
to the Cheese Market, Poperinghe, where it entrained at 5.50 for
Bollezelle, arriving there at 10.15 p.m., and went into billets in the
village. Here Battalion training was carried out so far as weather
conditions would permit, but this training was often reduced to snow
shovelling and even to snow balling! On the 7th we returned to “O”
Camp, and on the following day the Brigadier presented Military Medals
to Company-Sergeant-Major Crichton, Sergeant White, and Lance-Corporals
Pedder and Taylor. We were doing well in the football field hereabouts,
and defeated the Welsh Regiment, the A.S.C., and the 8th Liverpools in
succession.

[Sidenote: _Feb.–Mch.–April, 1917_]

On February 27th we moved up to Ypres again, but a thaw having set in
made road transport and marching extremely difficult. When back in
the line we moved over to the trenches in the Left Brigade Sector,
and got to know Saint Jean, Wieltje and the trenches immediately
north, including a dangerous spot north of Dixmude Gate, known as
Well X-Roads. Headquarters were established at La Brique Post. On
March 8th, 1917, Major P. E. Robathan, from a New Army Battalion of
the Royal Welch Fusiliers, was posted to the Battalion and appointed
second-in-command. In the trenches a great deal of patrolling and
investigation of the “Canadian Dugouts”--the old gun pits dating
back to the First Battle of Ypres--which lay half-way between the
lines. Lieut. (afterwards Major) J. H. Evans was very active in this
patrol work. Trench life on the whole was uneventful, although enemy
trench mortars were occasionally active. After the transition period,
October to December, 1916, the Battalion had shaken down and the
new organization was working smoothly--new commanding officer, new
second-in-command, and new adjutant. Reinforcement officers had settled
down, and the Battalion was gradually attaining the fine condition it
enjoyed before the Third Battle of Ypres.

On April 16th we were relieved by the 10th Liverpool Scottish and
proceeded to “Z” Camp. The following day the Battalion marched to
Herzeele and went into billets, where a day or two was spent in
cleaning up, organization, and bathing. On the 22nd we marched to
Buysscheure and stayed the night in billets. The following day the
Battalion reached its destination, Moulle, near St. Omer. This pleasant
region was all that could be desired. The severe winter had given way
to glorious spring, and feathered songsters, no less than ourselves,
revelled in its advent. The silence of the clear moonlight nights was
varied by the song of the nightingale in almost embarrassing volume.

For some time the Quartermaster, Lieut. J. Crossley, had shown signs of
the strain of the campaign, and on May 7th he returned to England for
a rest, after two years at the front, and was relieved by Lieut. P. W.
Powell.




                             CHAPTER VII.

                        THIRD BATTLE OF YPRES.

                           July 31st, 1917.


[Sidenote: _May, 1917_]

From April 23rd to May 6th we remained in Moulle under perfect
conditions. The time was given over principally to practising the
attack and consolidation of trenches. Training began early in the
mornings and the afternoons were devoted to relaxation. The downs west
of St. Omer formed ideal country for the re-conditioning of troops from
the Salient, while by way of relaxation inter-Company league football
matches were played. These were keenly contested and aroused close
interest. St. Omer, too, lay within easy reach and a visit amply repaid
the tedium of the brief journey. It was a sort of half-way house to
Calais, and its amenities could not be excelled in another town of
equal size. Its parks, even in wartime, were beautifully laid out and
kept in irreproachable condition. The _beau monde_ of St. Omer
loved to dawdle in the gardens during these fine spring evenings, and
an attractive wartime gaiety pervaded the whole town. Troops of various
nationalities strolled about the boulevards or sat sipping coffee in
the restaurants. Blue and khaki uniforms intermixed in the streets
everywhere. Cadets wearing green bands were to be encountered at every
corner. Flying Corps officers seemed to monopolise the club in the
Grand Place. About the easy manners of the _boulevardier_ there
was an inexplicable charm, which, try as we might, we could never hope
to imitate.

These pleasant days came to an end all too quickly, and on May 6th the
Battalion began its return journey, marching to Buysscheure, where it
went into billets for the night. The march was resumed the following
morning to Arneke, where we entrained for Poperinghe and thence by
march to “A” Camp, near Vlamertinghe, once more. Camp was shelled by
long-range guns, causing some casualties.

[Sidenote: _May–June, 1917_]

On the evening of the 8th the Battalion relieved the 4th South
Lancashire Regiment in the right sub-sector of the Potijze Sector,
and started work immediately on the trenches and patrolling. During
the night of the 11th the battalions on our left and right made raids
on the enemy line, and we suffered a few casualties in consequence.
During the night of the 13th our patrol of two officers and three other
ranks encountered a strong enemy patrol of fifteen to twenty men and
dispersed them. Life hereabouts alternated between the trenches in the
Potijze Sector and billets in Ypres, and was of a more or less routine
character. The Battalion played no part, save that of spectators, in
the Second Army’s capture of the Messines Ridge on June 7th. But before
that operation lavish use of scaling ladders and shrapnel helmets was
made in our trenches in order to deceive the enemy as to the front from
which the expected attack would be delivered. At 3.10 a.m. on June 7th
the Battalion saw to the south-east of Ypres nineteen gigantic poppies
rise out of the darkness, the firing of the mines upon which the
tunnelling companies had been occupied for two years; and even to-day
the sight remains imprinted upon the visual memory.

On the evening of June 9th a smart little raid was carried out to
ascertain if the Messines operations had resulted in any transfer of
enemy troops from other areas. A party of thirty other ranks of the
Battalion, under Second-Lieut. J. C. Alexander, entered the German
lines at Ibex Trench, capturing six Germans and killing three others,
with no casualties amongst our men. This was a most successful
operation. Second-Lieut. J. Alexander was awarded the Military Cross
for his leadership, while Lance-Corporal C. F. Cooper and Private J.
McAlarney each received the Military Medal for bravery displayed during
the raid.

On the morning of the 11th the Battalion marched to Poperinghe,
entrained for Esquelbecq, and thence by route march to billets
at Bollezeele for training. On the 13th, after cleaning up and
bathing parades, Companies were inspected by the Commanding Officer,
Lieut.-Colonel G. B. Balfour. On the 16th we moved by road to billets
and bivouacs at Grand Difques (Headquarters and “B” Company) and Petite
Difques (“A,” “C” and “D” Companies), and Battalion training was resumed
in the familiar downlands west of St. Omer. The training was of a
more advanced nature than in April, and included Brigade field-days
with preparation for offensive warfare on a large scale. Training was
generally completed by the early afternoon, so that many hours of
sunshine remained to be enjoyed each day.

[Sidenote: _July, 1917_]

On June 30th Companies were inspected, and the transport moved by road
to Wallon Cappel _en route_ for the line once more, while on July
1st the Battalion marched to Lumbres and entrained for Brandhoek,
relieving the 4th Liverpools at Derby Camp. On our return to the
forward area we found great activity everywhere: formation of dumps,
preparation of gun positions, construction of tracks leading towards
Ypres through the country between Vlamertinghe and Brielen.

On the 2nd we relieved the 6th Liverpools in the Wieltje right
sub-sector of the line, and commenced work on trenches, sand-bagging
and repairing wire. The usual patrols were sent out nightly. There was
increasing activity and unrest on both sides, and we received a heavy
bombardment on the 3rd when the Brigade on our left carried out a raid.
On the 7th the Brigade on our right carried out a successful raid on
the enemy trenches, and he retaliated with a gas-shell bombardment. On
July 9th we were relieved by the 4th Loyals and proceeded to billets at
Derby Camp.

Nominally in billets, but truly in name only. July 9th to 19th--a
period of intense strain. Companies lived in dugouts and strong points
between Derby Camp and Ypres. About 7 p.m. “A” Company (Captain R.
Gardner, M.C.), like all the others, used to parade for a night’s work
in the trench area east of Ypres--mostly carrying up materials and
munitions from dumps at Potijze and St. Jean to selected positions
for new dumps in the front line system--very trying, as Ypres and the
forward area were shelled with gas the whole time and the parties had
to work for long periods in box respirators. In the end the allotted
tasks were all carried out, with heavyish casualties from shell fire
and mustard-gas poisoning; mustard gas began to be very bad from
that point onwards. On getting through the gas area to the west of
Ypres again the working parties not infrequently received salvoes
of machine gun fire from hostile aeroplanes a mile or so from their
dugouts. Breakfast on return (5 to 6 a.m.): sleep 6 a.m.--dinner (12
to 1 p.m.): afternoon spent in administration and “paper” warfare
with higher authority; then back again to Ypres about 7 p.m. Ypres a
grim sight: a mass of flames from burning dumps. Every evening until
the 19th the Battalion paraded as strong as possible for work in the
forward area. Intense activity was apparent everywhere, and there
were visible signs that operations on a large scale were in early
contemplation.

The objective of the Flanders offensive was the freeing of the
north-west of Belgium. The attack was delayed, partly owing to the
vastness of the preparations to be made on ground largely overlooked by
the enemy, partly to the policy of associating the hard-hit French with
the work of freeing part of Belgium. Three armies were to be employed
in the attack--the Second and Fifth British Armies and the First French
Army. Refitting and organization proceeded apace, and on the morning of
the 23rd Brigadier-General Stockwell addressed all Officers and N.C.O’s
regarding the forthcoming operations. On the 26th Companies were
inspected and addressed by the Commanding Officer, Lieut.-Colonel G.
B. Balfour, and on the evening of the 29th the Battalion, in fighting
order with packs, proceeded to the concentration area.

We concentrated, under cover, in an assembly area just south of
Vlamertinghe and were ordered to get as much rest as we could during
the 30th. Some no doubt, slept as ordered, and others, like Julius
Cæsar’s troops before the battle with Ariovistus and his Germans in 58
B.C., began to think of making their wills.

In the early evening of the 30th the Battalion moved up by companies
through the ruins and fires of Ypres towards Potijze and assembled in
Congreve Walk, between Potijze Road and Lone Street, to wait for zero
hour on the 31st. Major P. E. Robathan was in command, Colonel Balfour,
with other Officers, N.C.O.’s and men forming B. Echelon at the
Transport. We had a long wait through the night while the first stage
of the attack was carried out by the 165th and 166th Infantry Brigades.
At 3.30 a.m. on July 31st, under a barrage of more intense power than
any previously recorded in the war, nine Divisions of the Fifth Army
“went over the top,” while attacks in co-operation were carried out on
the right by the Second Army and on the left by the French.

By 9 a.m., after severe fighting, the assaulting battalions of the
165th and 166th Infantry Brigades had captured their objectives,
known as the Blue Line and the Black Line, on the north side of the
Ypres-Roulers railway, penetrating about one to one and a half miles
from Wieltje into the German system. To the 164th Infantry Brigade fell
the second stage of the attack, to pass through the 165th and 166th
Infantry Brigades and capture the enemy’s third line system, the Green
Line or Gheluvelt-Langemarch Line, about one mile beyond the Black Line.

At 8.20 a.m. the 164th Infantry Brigade began its advance on a
two-battalion frontage. The right front was formed by the 1/4th North
Lancashire Regiment with the Battalion in support, and touch was to be
kept on the right with battalions of the 45th Brigade (15th Division);
the left front was formed by the 2/5th Lancashire Fusiliers supported
by the 1/8th Liverpool (Irish). The slow advance from Congreve Walk
towards the Black Line was carried out in its early stages according
to schedule, and, in spite of a heavy retaliatory barrage, without
serious loss. But before the Black Line was reached it was found that
the enemy still held some of his concrete “pill-boxes” (the term
“farms” being a courtesy title) and fighting became very severe, the
support battalions becoming involved.

But the advance from the Black Line to the Green Line was the
Battalion’s real task. Wonderful as the barrage had been at the outset
it lost a little in intensity as the ranges lengthened and as time
progressed. The Green Line was reached by all units of the Brigade and
was held for about three hours. Among many who fought with gallantry
and devotion Lance-Sergeant T. F. Mayson behaved with a distinction
which won him the Victoria Cross. Single-handed he put out of action
two machine guns and their crews and during the enemy counter-attack
later in the day held up the advance at an isolated post by Lewis Gun
fire.

It was not possible to occupy the Green Line permanently (it was many
weeks before British troops again trod ground east of the Kansas
Cross roads). Although touch had been established on the Green Line
with the 15th Division on the right, the 39th Division on the left
had encountered such serious difficulties that, although their right
battalion gained touch with the Lancashire Fusiliers on the Green Line,
a defensive flank had to be formed.

[Sidenote: _August, 1917_]

Moreover, in the early evening the enemy delivered a most determined
counter-attack against the Green Line, and the Battalion, contesting,
like the other units, every inch of ground, was compelled to withdraw
to the Black Line, which it held against counter-attack, and at 1.30
a.m. on August 1st received orders to withdraw to the old British front
line. Battalion Headquarters moved from Pommern Redoubt, and about
5 a.m. reached the mined dugout in Oxford Trench, where they joined
Lieut.-Colonel Hindle, D.S.O., of the 4th Loyals, and his battalion
headquarters.

The remnants of the Battalion and those of the 4th Loyals, manned the
old front line from the top of New John Street to Warwick Farm. It was
not until mid-day that all the survivors were collected--about 150 in
all. Lieut. C. E. Withey took command of the front line, having under
him Second-Lieuts. Lauder, Newbold, Gribble, Latham and Ellwood, and
Second-Lieut. Lonsdale, of the 4th Loyals. Information was received
that the enemy had driven back our advanced posts upon the Frezenberg
Line and was preparing to assault that line. Preparations were
accordingly made to hold the old front line as strongly as possible and
a defence was quickly organised.

Heavy rain had rendered the old trench almost untenable, and the task
of reforming trench duties and taking round the rations was extremely
difficult. Towards midnight fifty stragglers were brought up from
Transport lines, under Second-Lieut. Lingford, to reinforce the
garrison. No casualties were sustained in the fire trench, although
it was intermittently shelled. On August 2nd information was received
that the Brigade was to be relieved by the 108th Brigade. The relieving
troops arrived at 1.30 p.m., and relief was reported complete by 2.30.
The situation was quiet during the morning, and no further casualties
were sustained.

Upon relief by the 9th Royal Irish Rifles, Companies moved off
independently, and by 5 p.m. had all reached the old concentration area
at Vlamertinghe. Battalion Headquarters boarded a motor lorry outside
St. Jean and had not proceeded very far when a heavy shell exploded
just behind. Three were seriously wounded (two of whom afterwards
died) and two slightly wounded. Colonel Hindle, of the 4th Loyals,
Major Robathan, and the other occupants of the wagon had very narrow
escapes. On reaching the concentration area everyone received a welcome
rum ration--an indulgence which in a few instances produced curious
effects! Food was ready and also baths and clean clothes. Colonel
Balfour and the Officers and N.C.O.’s of the “B” List were assiduous
in their attentions to the survivors. They had had information of
the progress of the battle from wounded Officers passing through the
Clearing Station at Vlamertinghe Mill. At 8.45 the Battalion left
the concentration area and proceeded by buses--in a long convoy with
the other units of the Brigade--to the Watou No. 3 Area, _via_
Brandhoek and Poperinghe.

Camp outside Watou was reached about 1 a.m. on the 3rd, rations and
transport arriving a little later. Heavy rain had fallen and the
camp was a quagmire, but the exhausted troops threw themselves down
thankfully and were soon oblivious to their discomforts. Little else,
except sleep, was done during the day, but stock was taken of the
situation and casualties were estimated. The Battalion sustained the
following Officer casualties:--

    Capt. W. R. Pattinson                Wounded.
    Capt. H. A. Brocklebank              Wounded and missing.
    Second-Lieut. G. W. Ford             Killed.
    Second-Lieut. J. A. McGill           Wounded.
    Second-Lieut. H. J. Warbrick         Wounded.
    Second-Lieut. J. C. Alexander, M.C.  Wounded.
    Second-Lieut. F. C. Gilling          Wounded.
    Lieut. S. F. Walker                  Wounded.
    Second-Lieut. J. D. Johnstone        Killed.
    Second-Lieut. R. Bradley             Killed.
    Second-Lieut. J. R. Gaulter          Wounded.
    Second-Lieut. T. H. Middleton        Wounded.
    Second-Lieut. P. C. Taylor           Wounded.

Other ranks: 21 killed, 145 wounded and 46 missing. The Battalion
captured four machine guns and its fair share of the 500 prisoners
captured by the Division. The casualties of the Battalion were not so
serious as those of other units in the Brigade. This grievous toll
was the price paid for an operation in which the Battalion again
vindicated its reputation for valour and devotion to duty. That this
view was shared by the higher authorities is shown by the following
communications, which it is fitting should be given here in full:--

                   55TH (WEST LANCASHIRE) DIVISION.

                       SPECIAL ORDER OF THE DAY.

                          _3rd August, 1917._

   _To all Ranks of the 55th (West Lancashire) Division._

   Before you went into action on the 31st July, I told you how
   confident I was that the Division would do its duty, and
   maintain its reputation, and the reputations of the grand
   Regiments to which you belong.

   You have done more than that.

   The attack you made on the 31st is worthy to rank with the great
   deeds of the British Army in the past, and has added fresh glory
   to the record of that Army.

   The courage, determination, and self-sacrifice shown by
   Officers, Warrant Officers, Non-Commissioned Officers and men is
   beyond praise. It is a fine exhibition of true discipline, which
   comes from the mutual confidence of all ranks in themselves,
   their comrades, their leaders and those under them. This in its
   turn is the product of hard training. Your doings on the 31st
   show how well you have turned this training to account.

   You have captured every inch of the objectives allotted to you.
   It was not your fault that you could not hold all you took.
   You have broken and now hold in spite of weather and counter
   attacks, a line that the enemy has strengthened and consolidated
   at his leisure for more than two years.

   This will, I believe, be the beginning of the end. When
   your turn comes to go forward again you will know your own
   strength--and the enemy will know it too.

   I am proud of what you have done, and am confident that with
   such troops ultimate victory is certain.

                            (Signed)  H. S. JEUDWINE,
                                            _Major-General_,
                          _Commanding 55th (West Lancashire) Division_.


                                                     FIFTH ARMY,
                                                        G.A. 790/7.
                                                    _3rd August, 1917._

   XIX CORPS.

   The Army Commander wishes to convey his thanks and
   congratulations to the G.O.C. and all Ranks of the 164th Brigade
   on their fine performance on July 31st. They carried out their
   task in a most gallant manner, and fought splendidly to retain
   their hold on the ground won.

   All Officers showed energy, courage and initiative in dealing
   with the situation, and the men under their command, in spite of
   heavy losses, did their utmost by carrying out their orders, to
   ensure our success and the enemy’s defeat.

   Great credit and praise is due to the G.O.C., 164th Brigade, for
   the magnificent behaviour of the troops under his command.

                                           (Signed) N. MALCOLM,
                                                  _Major-General, G.S._


                                  2.

                                                164TH INFANTRY BRIGADE,
                                                       No. G. 280.

   1/4TH ROYAL LANCS. REGT.

   The Brigadier-General Commanding has much pleasure in forwarding
   the above remarks of the Army Commander, and directs that these
   be communicated to all ranks.

   He considers that all credit and praise is due to the Officers
   and men of the Brigade.
                            (Signed) G. SURTEES, _2nd Lieut._,
                                                  _for Captain_,
                        _Acting Brigade Major, 164th Infantry Brigade_.
    _6th August, 1917._


The process of “cleaning up” and re-equipment was begun. All Companies
attended baths. Narratives were written by Company Commanders,
Platoon Commanders and Section Leaders. From these a Battalion Report
was compiled by Major Robathan and submitted to Brigade. Rain fell
persistently throughout the day but the evening was fine. At 2.30 a.m.
on the 5th August orders were received from Brigade for a move to an
area on the Lines of Communication, and at 7.30 a.m. the Battalion
left camp and proceeded to Abeele Station, where it halted for an
hour until the time for entrainment arrived. This was completed
by 11 a.m., and travelling via the Hazebrouck switch line and St.
Omer the Battalion detrained at Audruicq, and was conveyed in motor
lorries down the valley of the Hem, via Nordausques and Tournehem, to
Bonningues-les-Ardres. Here excellent and commodious billets had been
arranged for both Officers and men. The village had not been occupied
by troops for some time, and the inhabitants gave the Battalion a
splendid welcome. The well-wooded valley and surrounding moors were
a delightful change from the flats of Flanders. With us in the same
village were billeted the 8th Liverpools, while Brigade Headquarters
were at Tournehem.

Reorganization of Companies was commenced. “A” Company under Lieut.
Withey, “B” Company under 2nd Lieut. Evans, “C” Company under Capt.
Procter, and “D” Company under 2nd Lieut. R. M. Senton. Reinforcements
were arriving and were posted to the different Companies. On parade
the Commanding Officer addressed the Battalion, expressing his pride
in what they had done. A long and pleasant period ensued in these
delighful surroundings, the time being devoted to training in the
morning and to recreation in the afternoon and evening. A Sports’
Committee was formed and the utmost keenness was displayed in the
various competitions. A Battalion Sports and Gymkhana was held on
the afternoon of the 16th August, from 2 to 9 p.m. This was favoured
by splendid weather, and there was a large gathering of interested
spectators. There was a keen struggle for the Inter-Company Cup offered
for competition by the Commanding Officer, this being eventually won on
the following day, when the sports were continued, by the Transport.
These wound up in the evening with a Battalion Concert, organized by
2nd Lieut. Mudie, a gifted entertainer, who himself contributed his
little masterpiece “Three Hundred and Sixty-five Days.” A delightful
addition to these light-hearted proceedings took place when orders
were received from Brigade for forty-eight hours’ leave to be granted
to Officers to visit the coast of France, and twenty-four hours’ leave
to other Ranks to visit Calais. In the Brigade Sports, Battalion
representatives were uniformly successful, the Tug-of-War, 2 Miles, 1
Mile, and Association Football falling to us.

Reinforcements continued to arrive, amongst them being Second-Lieuts.
E. D. Howard, Veevers, White, E. Haslam, N. Whittaker, T. H. Pritchard,
and R. G. Hatcher.

Training went on apace, and distinction was conferred on the Battalion
when a Platoon, under 2nd Lieut. Ellwood, was selected to give a
demonstration attack upon a strong point. Officers and N.C.O.’s from
Divisions in the Fifth Army attended this demonstration, which went
on for some days, and on 19th August, Field Marshal Sir Douglas Haig
visited the Division and saw the Battalion at work in field operations.

[Sidenote: _September, 1917_]

During our stay at Bonningues-les-Ardres, Lieut.-Col. G. B. Balfour
was invalided from the Battalion with scarlet fever, and command was
taken by Major P. E. Robathan. Captain and Adjutant J. Way returned to
England for a period of home service, and was succeeded as Adjutant by
Capt. R. Gardner. On the 6th September we marched to Moulle, of old
acquaintance, and fired field practices by Companies, but preparation
soon began for a return to the Ypres Salient. During the Division’s
period of absence from the line, several attempts by other Divisions
had been made to advance from the Black Line, but without marked
success. On the 10th the Battalion, together with the remainder of the
Brigade, took part in Divisional operations on ground representing the
area the Division will operate on in the forthcoming attack.

On the 14th the Battalion moved by road to Audruicq, and there
entrained for Ypres, where we were billeted in tent and bivouacs
near Goldfish Chateau. On the following day a hostile squadron of
aeroplanes dropped three bombs on the camp, killing one and wounding
three others of other regiments. Capt. Wilson, our Medical Officer, was
also slightly wounded, but remained on duty. Next morning the camp was
again bombed by enemy aircraft, this time killing three and wounding
five other ranks of the Battalion. Bombs dropped a few yards from the
tent used as the Battalion Orderly Room, the Battalion Runners and
Headquarters details were the sufferers. Later in the day Second-Lieut.
Whittaker was wounded in the arm by an anti-aircraft machine gun bullet.

On the 17th the Battalion was finally organized and, after the news of
Sergt. Mayson’s V.C. had come through, in the evening marched through
St. Jean and Wieltje to the Concentration Area, “B” and “D” Companies
Headquarters in Call Reserve (old German Reserve trench), and “C” and
“A” in the old British front line. We incurred casualties in 3 killed
and 4 wounded. The following day Officers and N.C.O.’s reconnoitred
the front line and position of attack, and “D” Company relieved the
10th Liverpool Scottish in the front shell-hole system, the Battalion
suffering 3 killed and 7 wounded in these operations. On the 19th
September we were fitted out with stores and extra rations, and moved
to positions of attack in shell holes between Somme and Hinducott, with
Headquarters at Capricorn Keep.

Major P. E. Robathan commanded the Battalion, with Captain J. H.
Evans as Second-in-command. The 164th Infantry Brigade attacked on
a two-battalion frontage, 1/4th Royal Lancashire Regiment on the
right, 2/5th Lancashire Fusiliers on the left. 1/4th North Lancashire
Regiment acted as support to the Battalion, and 1/5th Royal Lancashire
Regiment, from 166th Infantry Brigade, was a reserve Battalion placed
under the command of the Brigadier-General Commanding, 164th Infantry
Brigade. The Battalion had orders to reach an intermediate objective,
the dotted Red Line; 1/4th North Lancashire Regiment, after supporting
the Battalion at the outset, was to pass through it and advance to the
Green Line. The attack was on a vast scale, eleven Divisions being
employed.

During the night of the 19th–20th September platoons took up their
positions in shell holes west of the line Somme--Hinducott amidst a
severe bombardment, which had been going on for some days. At zero
hour (5.40 a.m. on the 20th September) the first wave advanced on the
enemy positions between Hinducott and Somme, and reached its first
objective in spite of stubborn opposition, especially from Aisne Farm
and Loos. Here, after a slight pause in the barrage, “A” and “C”
Companies continued to advance, but sustained heavy casualties from
enfilade fire. Owing to appalling mud, and determined opposition from
the garrisons of “pill-boxes,” the advance was slow, and the support
Battalion, 1/4th North Lancashire Regiment, soon became involved in the
fighting. The Battalion reached the dotted Red Line, but the support
Battalion was not sufficiently strong to continue the advance, and
eventually both Battalions held a line from Schuler Galleries to Loos,
under heavy bombardment and enfilade fire from both flanks. Capt. A.
P. Procter, commanding “C” Company, was placed in command of the front
line, which was manned by both Battalions and reinforcements from the
reserve Battalion, 1/5th Royal Lancashire Regiment.

Patrols were sent out during the night to ascertain the enemy’s
positions, and forward posts pushed ahead. During the morning of the
21st, small parties of the enemy were observed coming down the forward
slopes in front of Gravenstafel carrying Red Cross flags. At 4.50 p.m.
the 8th Liverpool (Irish) occupied Schuler Farm and pushed forward to
the Green Line, at the same time the 5th Lancashire Fusiliers moved
forward from Schuler Galleries towards Cross Cotts. In the evening
the enemy intensely bombarded our front line, but no counter-attack
was made. During the night posts were pushed forward to prepare for
a further advance next night. At dawn on the 22nd, the enemy heavily
shelled our front line, and a small party was seen advancing towards
us. Our artillery and machine guns replied, and the hostile bombardment
ceased. During the morning our front line was again heavily shelled
by the enemy, and also again in the evening, but no attack was made
against us. Just before dawn on the 23rd, our front line was intensely
bombarded, our machine guns replying, and the bombardment died down.
On the afternoon of the 23rd, preparations were made for the relief
of the 39th Division. Guides had assembled at Battalion Headquarters,
Capricorn Keep, and were about to lead to their positions the guides
of the incoming unit, when, at 5.15 p.m., the whole of the Battalion
area was subjected to a violent bombardment, which lasted till 8 p.m.
Practically no casualties were sustained. What it must have been like
for the Companies out in the open can only be imagined, but in the
Battalion Headquarters’ dugout, with entrance conveniently facing the
enemy, the occupants waited, with what philosophy they could, for a
shell to intrude and sever their connection with the Third Battle of
Ypres. But none came. After some excitement concerning the whereabouts
of a platoon, the Battalion was relieved at 1.45 a.m. on September
24th by two platoons of the 2/6th North Staffordshire Regiment. The
survivors tramped through Wieltje to St. Jean for the last time, and
said farewell to Ypres. From Vlamertinghe we went by train and bus to
Watou.

During these operations the Battalion sustained the following
casualties:--

Captain C. E. Withey and Second-Lieut. E. T. White killed.
Second-Lieuts. G. C. Lingford (died of wounds), G. A. Taylor, T. H.
Pritchard, C. H. Newbold, R. M. Senton, and J. Thompson, wounded, and
R. G. Hatcher, died of wounds. Second-Lieut. C. G. Howard missing.

Other Ranks: Killed, 37; Wounded, 155; Wounded and Missing, 1; Shell
Shock, 6; Missing, 24. Total, all ranks, 233. At a later date the
Officer temporarily in Command, Major P. E. Robathan, also went to
hospital suffering from the effects of gas.

The conspicuous value and success of these strenuous operations is
amply testified by the following communications received from the
higher authorities:--


                   55TH (WEST LANCASHIRE) DIVISION.

                           ORDER OF THE DAY.

   1. The following telegrams have been received:--

     “Fifth Army wire begins. The Army Commander wishes to thank
   all arms and all ranks for their splendid efforts in to-day’s
   battle. Co-operation between Infantry, Artillery and Flying
   Corps has been excellent, and very important successes have been
   gained all along the front. Ends.”

   “Corps Commander thanks Field and Heavy Artillery for their good
   work, and the Forward Observation Officers for the very useful
   and timely information sent in. Ends.”

   “Corps Commander congratulates 9th and 55th Divisions and thanks
   them for their success to-day. Ends.”


   2. The Major-General Commanding wishes to add his thanks and
   congratulations to all arms and ranks of the Division.

   There is no doubt whatever that in addition to making a very
   substantial advance over difficult ground, stubbornly defended,
   well organized, and liberally provided with strong cover,
   artillery and machine guns, the Division, aided most ably by the
   Corps Heavy Artillery, succeeded in dealing the enemy a very
   heavy blow, and causing him severe losses.

   Success was due to the fine determination shown by all ranks
   and the hearty co-operation of Artillery, Engineers, Infantry,
   Machine Gun Companies, Trench Mortars and the R.A.M.C. with each
   other, which is the sign of a united and disciplined Division.

                                    (Signed) T. ROSE PRICE,
                                              _Lieut.-Colonel_,
                                       _General Staff, 55th Division_.
    _21st September,_ 1917.


                   55TH (WEST LANCASHIRE) DIVISION.

                           ORDER OF THE DAY.

The following telegrams from the V Corps have been received:--

   “The Commander-in-Chief visited Corps Headquarters this evening
   and expressed himself very pleased in the work of both Divisions
   and sends them his congratulations and thanks.”

   “Fifth Army wire begins. Please congratulate 55th Division on
   the gallant defence of Hill 37 yesterday, and upon the energy
   and resource displayed by Commanders on the spot in organizing
   counter-attacks. Ends.”

                                    (Signed) T. ROSE PRICE,
                                               _Lieut.-Colonel_,
                                        _General Staff, 55th Division._
    _23rd September, 1917._


                   55TH (WEST LANCASHIRE) DIVISION.

                           ORDER OF THE DAY.

The following telegram has been received from the Right Honourable E.
G. V. Earl of Derby, K.G., G.C.V.O., C.B., Secretary of State for War:--

   “General Jeudwine, 55th Division Headquarters, B.E.F.

   “Well done 55th West Lancashire Division. Accept my most hearty
   congratulations. I sincerely trust your losses are not heavy.

                                                Derby.”
                                      (Signed) T. ROSE PRICE,
                                                _Lieut.-Colonel_,
                                        _General Staff, 55th Division._
    _24th September, 1917._


                   55TH (WEST LANCASHIRE) DIVISION.

                           ORDER OF THE DAY.

The following telegram has been received from Fifth Army:--

    “55TH DIVISION.

   “Please convey to all ranks 55th Division the Army Commander’s
   congratulations on the fine record of the Division during the
   hard fighting of the past two months. The Army Commander wishes
   specially to thank all ranks for their splendid efforts, which
   have contributed greatly to the success of the last attack,
   and to wish them all good luck and success in the future.
   Despite their long period in the line prior to commencement of
   operations they have well maintained and increased their high
   reputation.
                                                  “FIFTH ARMY.”


The following telegram has been received from the West Lancashire
Reserve Brigade:--

    “G.O.C. 55TH DIVISION, FRANCE.

   “Brigadier-General Stuart and all ranks West Lancashire Reserve
   Brigade send heartiest congratulations to West Lancashire
   Division on their splendid success.”

                                       (Signed) T. ROSE PRICE,
                                                _Lieut.-Colonel_,
                                        _General Staff, 55th Division._
    _27th September, 1917._

While it is true that virtue is its own reward, and kindles a pure
unquenchable flame in men’s hearts, it would be idle to deny that
these cordial messages of appreciation of their sacrifices cheered
the Battalion profoundly and steeled their determination for further
efforts in the stern task yet to be accomplished.

On the 25th we spent a day cleaning up and resting. At 1 p.m. Major
Robathan addressed all Officers and other ranks who had been in battle.
Reinforcements as follows were received during the day: Second-Lieuts.
L. R. Keighley, J. R. Rundle, H. Walkden, A. J. Thorpe, F. J. Shuker,
R. L. Purnell, B. H. Gough, and 18 other Ranks. At 9.30 p.m. we moved
by march route to Hopoutre Station and entrained for Bapaume West, in
the Lens area. We arrived here at 12.30 p.m. on the 26th, and then
marched via Bapaume--Le Transloy--Rocquigny and Bus, to Ytres (not to
be confused with Ypres) to a camp at Vallulart Wood. This was a long
and tiring march; 15 men dropped out, but every one of these rejoined.
Here Platoon and Company training of an easy nature was carried out
until the 2nd October, when the Battalion was again on the move. At
9.15 a.m., accompanied by the Band and Transport, we marched out of
camp and proceeding via Etricourt--where we marched past the G.O.C.
55th Division--Manancourt--where the Brigadier-General Commanding
164th Brigade watched the Battalion marching--Nurlu--Aizecourt-le-Bas
to Longavesnes where we arrived in billets at 12.50 p.m. The weather
set in cold and wet and was a disagreeable change from the perfect
conditions we had enjoyed for several weeks. Captain A. P. Procter was
temporarily in command of the Battalion.

Platoon and Company training was resumed and routes to the new trench
sector at St. Emilie were reconnoitred. A rousing Rugby football match
was played between the Battalion and Flying Corps Squadron XV. The
“Aces” were too good for the “King’s Own,” and we went under by 13
points to 5. Major Robathan rejoined from hospital, together with 12
Officer reinforcements. On the 12th October we marched into Brigade
Reserve at St. Emilie, under wet and unpleasant conditions, relieving
the 6th King’s Liverpools, while on the following evening the Battalion
took over trenches from the 7th King’s Liverpool Regiment in the
right sub-sector of the Right Sector at St. Emilie. Dispositions were
as follows: Right front line Cat Post “C” Company. Left front line
Gillemont Farm, “A” Company, Support Company, Duncan and Doleful Posts,
“B” Company. Reserve Company “D” Company and Battalion Headquarters at
Ken Lane. At 9.50 p.m. the relief was completed with no casualties. We
found the trenches in very fair condition, but much draining, reveting
and duck-boarding required.

[Sidenote: _Oct.–Nov., 1917_]

A comparatively quiet period followed. There were occasional heavy
bombardments by the enemy’s Minenwerfers and Granatenwerfers. These did
considerable damage to our trenches but no casualties occurred, and our
Trench Mortars replied vigorously. Trench life alternated with periods
in Brigade Support in St. Emilie and Lempire, until the Battalion went
into Divisional Reserve on 2nd November in Longavesnes. The following
Officer reinforcements joined during October: Second-Lieuts. R. Smith,
R. W. Higginson, W. M. Stewart, G. Field, R. S. Dane, J. Mackay,
G. F. Raeside, A. J. Dartnell, G. N. Russell, A. H. Pemberton, W.
McAndrew, J. H. Sykes, N. Smith, C. J. Holland, G. W. Ferguson. Corpl.
W. Masters, “D” Company, was killed in action, and Lance-Corpl. A.
Clark, “D” Company, Pte. H. Bolton, “B” Company and Pte. H. Caton,
“D” Company, wounded, the two latter accidentally. The following
Decorations were awarded to Officers, N.C.O.s and men for gallantry and
devotion to duty in the fighting of September 20th/23rd:--

_Military Cross._--A/Capt. A. P. Procter, Lieut. and Qr.-Mr. P. W.
Powell, Second-Lieuts. A. S. Latham and G. A. Taylor.

_Distinguished Conduct Medal._--C.S.M. D. Graham, Sergt. F. S.
Yates, Sergt. A. Burton, Lance-Sergt. J. R. Pearson.

_Military Medal._--Corpl. T. Wright, Pte. A. E. Ashburn, Corpl. E.
Lockey, Lance-Sergt. W. Whiteside, C.Q.M. Sergt. W. G. Hinds, Pte. J.
Wild, Sergt. H. Myers, Lance-Corpl. H. Dobbs, Lance-Corpl. T. Chester
and Pte. E. G. Robinson.

[Sidenote: _November, 1917_]

Lieut.-Colonel G. B. Balfour then returned from sick leave to command
the Battalion.

The period in Longavesnes was spent in Company training and organized
games. Medals were presented to the winners of the Football
Competition, and the Cup offered by Colonel Balfour was presented to
the Transport for the Sports held at Bonningues in September. The
Battalion was also exercised in the Practice Attack as a preliminary
to the real operations now impending. The Battalion Band, under Band
Sergt. Rickwood, had at this time attained to a fine standard of
efficiency, and, while adding considerably to the amenities, were a
real asset on the march. At 5 p.m. on the 17th November we marched
out from Longavesnes en route for St. Emilie, a distance of 6 miles,
and reached billets at 6.45 p.m. At 7 p.m. on the 19th the Battalion
marched out by Companies at half-hour intervals to take up attack
positions in the right sub-sector of the Right Sector. (Gillemont Farm.)

At 2.45 a.m. on the 20th November, Companies were all in position for
the attack. Their disposition was “A” Company and 1 Platoon “D” Company
on the right in Stokes Trench. “B” Company and 1 Platoon “D” Company in
centre in Stokes Trench. “C” Company and 1 Platoon “D” Company on left
in Blunt Nose. One Company 4th Loyal North Lancashire Regiment held
Cat Post--Dog Trench during the attack. At zero hour, 6.20 a.m., the
attack pushed forward under a heavy barrage of guns, trench mortars and
machine guns. The enemy wire was found to be very thick and generally
unbroken, and his barrage was quickly put down on our front line and
approaches. This barrage increased as time went on; guns from both
flanks evidently being brought into action. The Right Flank made good
progress in spite of strong opposition, and all but gained their final
objective. The Centre Company from the start encountered heavy machine
gun fire, and when they reached the enemy immediate support line, were
met with showers of bombs and rifle grenades, the enemy making a very
stubborn resistance.

They pushed on, however, and made progress for a time, but being
greatly outnumbered, and suffering heavy casualties, they were held up
short of the final objective. The Left Company encountered almost uncut
wire, but, forcing their way through, they pushed on until, running
short of bombs, and meeting superior forces of the enemy, they were
held up.

The Left Company were gradually forced back, as the attack on the left
Battalion had failed, while the Centre Company were ejected from their
forward position, and were hard pressed to hold their own. Towards
noon the Left Company had been forced back to the enemy front line,
while the Centre Company were in danger of being cut off from the Right
Company, who were themselves being forced gradually back.

At 12.45 p.m. reinforcements were sent up from the 5th King’s
Liverpools, and, with the help of these 2 Platoons, the Centre Company
attempted to consolidate the enemy front line, and join up with the
Right Company. About 1 p.m. the enemy made a very determined attack,
and forced the Centre Company back into our original line by weight of
numbers, and superiority of bombs, rifle grenades, etc. Enemy trench
mortars and artillery were active on our Support Line and roads of
approach. The Right Company, finding both flanks in the air, and being
attacked by superior numbers, fell back to avoid being surrounded and
cut off altogether. The fighting all morning was particularly fierce,
but the enemy were superior in numbers and ammunition, and great
difficulty was experienced in getting ammunition through the enemy
barrage to the attacking Companies. The Companies reorganized in our
front line, and devoted all their efforts to clearing the trenches of
wounded, debris, etc.

The Battalion was relieved during the night of the 20th /21st by the
4th Loyals, and moved into dugouts in Ken Lane--Sart Lane, the relief
being completed by 4.30 a.m. The day was spent resting, cleaning
clothes, arms, etc., and salving of equipment, arms, and the removal
of dead from the front line. At 6 p.m. on the 22nd Companies moved
off independently and concentrated at St. Emilie, where they were met
by the Band, and marched to billets in Longavesnes, and became part
of the Divisional Reserve. At 2.30 p.m. on the 23rd the Major-General
Commanding the Division came and spoke to the Battalion, which paraded
in fatigue dress. In the course of his remarks, the General stated that
“Although the Battalion did not hold their gains, yet they more than
achieved the object of this attack. A considerable quantity of men and
guns were kept employed opposite our front, and so assisted our advance
at Cambrai. No enemy reinforcements left our front until late in the
day.”

The following casualties were sustained during this attack:--

Officers.--Killed, Lieut. A. M. Clark (displayed splendid leadership
in Gillemont Crescent), Second-Lieut. A. J. Dartnell. Wounded,
Second-Lieut. J. R. Rundle (died of wounds), Capt. T. R. Blain,
Second-Lieuts. R. Smith, J. Mackay, J. H. Sykes, G. Field, L. R.
Keighley. Total, 9.

Other Ranks.--Killed 9, Wounded 113, Missing 80. Total 202.

There was little repose in this period of “rest” and the general
atmosphere was one of tension. On the 29th the Battalion was ordered
to “Stand To” and be ready to move immediately, as heavy enemy attacks
were expected opposite the Divisional front. At 8.30 a.m. on the 30th
we moved off by Companies to concentrate with the rest of the 164th
Brigade near St. Emilie. At 10.30 a.m. the Battalion was ordered to
move to Epehy and hold on at all costs. The enemy had broken through
on the flank of the Left Brigade, and cut off almost the whole of the
Brigade in the line. At 12 noon Companies extended to N.E. of Epehy and
advanced in extended order to reinforce the 5th King’s Own, who were
being forced back from their forward positions. Companies dug in a new
line about 300 yards behind the front line held by the 5th King’s Own.
The enemy were held, and we commenced to consolidate the position. The
evening was fairly quiet and our casualties had been small.

[Sidenote: _December, 1917_]

On the 1st December the Battalion were in immediate support to the
remains of the 166th Brigade, on the left of the Divisional front.
The line held was as follows: From Fallen Tree Road on the right to
Fourteen Willows Road and thence to Epehy--Villers Guislain Road on the
left. During the early morning a party of the 5th King’s Own and 10th
Liverpool Scottish, who had been surrounded in Limerick Post for nearly
twenty-four hours, fought their way out and regained our lines. This
party reinforced the front line and enabled closer touch to be gained
with the 5th Lancashire Fusiliers on our left. At 6 a.m. an attack was
due to commence by Tanks and Cavalry, with the intention of re-taking
Villers Guislain, but no action was observed, although the artillery
activity on the left increased considerably. At 9 a.m. however
an attack by cavalry commenced. Two Squadrons advanced along the
Epehy--Villers Guislain road and attempted to attack in the direction
of Villers Guislain, but they were so badly cut up by artillery fire
and Machine Guns that they withdrew to Epehy. Cavalry also attacked
from Little Priel Farm on the right, and managed to make progress. One
Squadron attempted to approach Villers Guislain by pushing along the
valley from Little Priel Farm, but were met with heavy machine gun fire
from Parr’s Bank, and although they held on to a forward position near
Fourteen Willows Road for some time, they suffered heavy casualties,
and were ultimately forced to withdraw.

The enemy made no further attempt to attack the Brigade front,
devoting his efforts to consolidating the ground gained, but his
artillery, Machine Guns and snipers were very active all morning. At
1 p.m. we launched a counter-attack with the intention of re-taking
Meath, Kildare and Limerick Posts, and making these posts a line
of resistance. About 200 of the 5th King’s Own, 10th Liverpool
Scottish and 5th Loyals, together with 2 Squadrons of Indian Cavalry,
constituted the attacking force. Inadequate Artillery support, and
heavy enemy Machine Gun fire were mainly responsible for the failure
of the attack, and the survivors returned to our front line, having
suffered severely. During the attack “A” Company moved up from
immediate support to the front line, S. of Fourteen Willows Road.

At 4.30 p.m. enemy Artillery became very active, Battalion Headquarters
in Fourteen Willows Road, our front line and support line to the right
of the Epehy--Villers Guislain Road, were heavily shelled for about
half an hour. As evening drew near, however, conditions became normal.
The 8th Liverpool Irish advanced on the left of Epehy--Villers Guislain
Road in support of the 4th Loyals, and eventually gained touch with the
left flank of the 166th Brigade on the right of Epehy--Villers Guislain
Road. The 166th Infantry Brigade, including the 4th King’s Own, were
relieved during the night by the 110th Infantry Brigade, 21st Division,
and went into billets in St. Emilie, the relief being completed at 1.30
a.m. on the 2nd December, and all Companies had arrived in billets
by 3.30 a.m. The day was spent in resting and cleaning equipment and
clothes, but we were again under orders to be ready to move at half an
hour’s notice. Reserves of ammunition, grenades, tools and rations were
brought up to establishment.

At 4 p.m. on the 4th December orders were received for the Battalion
to move up to Sandbag Alley to reinforce the Reserves of the 165th
Brigade. Companies moved off independently and all were safely in
dugouts by 8 p.m. In anticipation of an imminent enemy attack we
“stood to,” “C” and “D” Companies manning Queen’s Trench, and “A”
and “B” Companies remaining in Sandbag Alley. All being quiet on the
Brigade front Companies stood down at 7.30 a.m. At midnight on the 5th
the 165th Brigade including the 4th King’s Own, were relieved by the
48th Infantry Brigade, 16th Division. On completion Companies marched
independently to St. Emilie. Accommodation was exceedingly scarce, and
the whole Battalion were crowded into one Adrian Hut. The weather was
very cold, dry and frosty. At 5.30 a.m. on the 6th we were called on to
man the Brown Line as Reserves to the 48th Infantry Brigade, in case
of attack. After considerable difficulty this was completed, but the
morning proved exceptionally quiet, and the Battalion was ordered by
Division to return to billets in St. Emilie.

At 1 p.m. verbal orders were received from Colonel Eden, A.A. and
Q.M.G., that the Battalion would be relieved that day, and were to
proceed to Longavesnes. Accordingly at 2 p.m. we marched to the
Transport Lines at Villers Faucon and had tea. At 5 p.m., accompanied
by the Band, the Battalion marched into Longavesnes, and proceeded
thence by bus to Peronne, which was reached at 7.15, and by 8 p.m.
the whole Battalion had reached the Camp. The whole of the 7th was
spent in resting and making preparations for continuing the move. The
weather turned wet in the evening. At 10 a.m. on the 8th following
the 8th Liverpool Irish and 5th Lancashire Fusiliers, we marched to
Peronne-Flamicourt Station and entrained, leaving at 12 noon for
Beaumetz-les-Loges. On arrival at 9.30 p.m. we formed up behind the 8th
Liverpool Irish and marched into billets at Lattre St. Quentin at 2
a.m. on the 9th after a tiring march in the rain. The route travelled
was via Simoncourt--Wanquentin--Hauteville--Lattre St. Quentin. The
remainder of the day was spent in resting and cleaning up, rain falling
almost the whole day. The Transport, which had marched all the way
from Peronne, halting for the night of the 8th/9th at Courcelles,
arriving at 6 p.m.

On the 10th at 9 a.m. the Battalion was again on the march, moving via
Avesnes le Comte--Manin--Givenchy le Noble--Penin--Tinques, arriving
in billets in Bailleul-aux-Cornailles at 2 p.m., the weather being
fine but cold. The following day at 10.30 a.m. the march was resumed
via Monchy--Breton (where we marched past the Brigadier-General
Commanding 164th Infantry Brigade)--La Thieuloye--Valhuon Hestrus to
Eps, where billets were reached at 3 p.m., the weather being fine.
On the 12th at 10 a.m. the Battalion marched to Crepy via Petit
Anvin, billets being reached at 12 noon. At 10.30 a.m. on the 13th,
we made what was to be the last of this series of marches moving via
Fruges--Monteville--Radhinghem--Wandonne and Dennebroccq to Reclinghem
where we arrived in billets at 3.25 p.m. The weather continued warm and
bright.

After the hard fighting and strenuous exercises of the past few
months, the long period of rest in Reclinghem which followed was not
unacceptable. Freed from trench worries for the time being, leisurely
but thorough attention could be paid to reorganization, platoon and
company training, and this was the general routine now followed. The
Brigade Baths at Coyecque also received a full measure of patronage.
The weather turned cold, with leaden skies threatening snow, and this
duly arrived to give a traditional setting to Christmas Day. This was
our third Christmas in France and Belgium, and as the previous two
had been spent in the trenches at Authuille and Ypres respectively,
special efforts were made on this occasion to mark this genial festival
in a more fitting manner. A very pleasant day was spent, and one that
lingers in the memory. There was a Voluntary Church Parade in the
morning, which took place in the School at Reclinghem, and at 3.30
p.m. the Brigadier-General Commanding, accompanied by the Commanding
Officer, visited all the Companies in turn at dinner. The Sergeants,
after attending to the men’s needs, had their dinner at 5.30 p.m., and
they also received a visit from the Commanding Officer, when the usual
compliments of the season were exchanged. All Officers dined together
in the Headquarters Mess at 7.30 p.m., when the Battalion Band was in
attendance, and rendered an appropriate programme in a pleasing manner.
Altogether a memorable day.

[Sidenote: _January, 1918_]

New Year’s Day, 1918, was observed, by order of the Brigadier, as
a holiday from all parades, except for short inspection parades in
the morning. Sports were indulged in during the day, but the weather
conditions were too severe to admit of organized games. News was
received that the Brigadier-General Commanding (General Stockwell) had
been awarded the C.M.G., and a congratulatory message was sent from
the Colonel and all Officers. In spite of the adverse weather, which
necessitated much clearing of snow, training was persevered with, and
on the 19th January the First Army Commander, General Sir H. S. Horne,
inspected the 164th Infantry Brigade Group on the parade ground of
the 5th Lancashire Fusiliers, at Coyecque. He took the opportunity of
presenting medal ribands awarded to various members of the Battalion,
Officers, N.C.O.s and men. The massed Brigade Buglers, under Corporal
Parry of the 4th King’s Own, sounded the General Salute. The Battalion
Band played during the Inspection, and, as the various units marched
past, played the “March Past” of each Unit. The Army Commander, in his
address, referred to the fight at Gueudecourt on September 27th, 1916,
on which occasion the 164th Brigade was last under his Command--as
Commander of the XIV Corps. He complimented the Brigade on its fine
turnout, and steadiness on parade.




                             CHAPTER VIII.

                               GIVENCHY.


[Sidenote: _February, 1918_]

Time was passing, the enemy unconquered, and our pleasant stay in
Reclinghem came to an end. Companies engaged in preparations for the
Battalion move towards the Line. At 8.15 a.m. on the 7th February we
proceeded by march route via Beaumetz-les-Aire, Laires, Febvin, Palfart
to Ligny-les-Aires, where billets were reached at 12.30 p.m. Rain
fell in torrents during this march. At 10 a.m. the following morning
the march was resumed, and proceeding via St. Hilaire and Lillers, we
halted in billets for the night at Busnettes. The Battalion was joined
en route by 6 Officers and 194 other ranks of the 7th Bn. The King’s
Own, who had been posted to us on the disbandment of that Battalion. On
the 9th, at 9 a.m., we proceeded by march route via Chocques, Annezin,
Béthune, Vaudricourt and Drouvin to Houchin, where Camp was reached at
1 p.m. We spent four days in Houchin, where training was resumed while
the Commanding Officer, accompanied by the Intelligence Officer and
Company Commanders, proceeded to reconnoitre the line, preparatory to
the 164th Infantry Brigade taking over La Bassée Canal Sector.

On the 14th February the Battalion paraded, and moved up by Companies
at 100 yards interval, to take over position in the Line, as Support
Battalion to the Right Sector, and relieved the 6th Lancashire
Fusiliers, 42nd Division. On the 20th we relieved the 4th Loyals in the
left front Sub-Sector, and spent the time in repairing and improving
the trenches. Trench life at this period was comparatively uneventful,
quiet periods alternating with intermittent shelling on both sides,
while patrols scoured No Man’s Land nightly. Pte. Pepper accounted
for one of an enemy patrol, who was identified as belonging to “205
R.I.R.,” which useful item of information was duly conveyed to Brigade
Headquarters. On the 2nd March the Battalion was relieved by the 5th
Lancashire Fusiliers and moved back to Support in the Village Line. On
the 5th March we were relieved by portions of the 6th North Staffs,
and the 5th South Staffs. Regiment, and moved back by motor lorry to
Hingette, where the Battalion was now in Divisional Reserve.

[Sidenote: _March, 1918_]

The time was occupied in cleaning up, bathing parades to Béthune, and
training under Company arrangements. “Summer” time was adopted at 11
p.m. on the 9th, the clock being put forward an hour. This period
was anything but restful; there was much tension in the air, and the
Battalion was under “Stand To” orders in readiness to move to the
forward area in case of the expected enemy attack. At 6.10 a.m. on the
11th March, the Battalion received orders to move to the Concentration
Area near Gorre, and moved off in fighting order within half an hour of
receiving the order. The Battalion, with the remainder of the Brigade,
remained in the Concentration Area until 12 noon, when orders were
received to move back to Hignette, the orders as to standing-to still
remaining in force. A party of Officers and men reconnoitred the ground
behind the Portuguese Division on the left, in anticipation of a call
to move to the support of that Division. Reveille was now at 4.30 a.m.
daily. On the 12th the order to move to the Concentration Area, near
Gorre, was received at 6.10 a.m., and within ten minutes the Battalion
had moved off. At 10 a.m. we moved back, Headquarters and 2 Companies
going into billets at Essars, and 2 Companies to Choqvaux. This state
of acute preparation continued, and further reconnoitring of the
defences in rear of the Portuguese Division on our left took place.
This was a precautionary measure, in the event of orders being received
to form a defensive flank if the enemy penetrated the front of that
Division.

At 7 a.m. on the 17th, the Battalion moved off by Companies to
relieve the 5th King’s Liverpool Regt. in the line at Givenchy. The
dispositions were as follows: “C” Company left front; “D” Company
right front; “A” Company in support in Tunnels; “B” Company in reserve,
occupying Givenchy Keep, Mairie Redoubt, and Moat Farm Redoubt.
Battalion Headquarters were at South Moor Villas in Hitchen Road.
The day was very clear, and nine enemy observation balloons were up,
consequently much of our movement was observed, and the whole system
was shelled intermittently during the day. Quiet periods alternated
with heavy shelling by the enemy, gas shells being largely used, and
these mostly of the mustard gas variety. Wolfe Road, King’s Road and
Windy Corner, in the communication area, in addition to the above
mentioned posts, all received these unwelcome attentions. At midnight
on the 24th March our Artillery opened a heavy barrage of all calibres,
including trench mortars, machine guns, rifle grenades and thermite,
on the enemy trenches, and a successful raid was carried out by the
5th King’s Liverpool Regt. on our left, and nine prisoners were taken.
Enemy retaliation was practically nil. On examination, these prisoners
stated that an attack was imminent. In view of this statement the 5th
Lancashire Fusiliers were ordered up to the Village Line to strengthen
the defences, one Company being attached to our Battalion. Additional
Machine Guns were also brought into the Sector, but no attack developed
for the time being. On the 27th our snipers had a very successful day,
accounting for six of the enemy, including an Officer.

The night was remarkably quiet, and we were relieved by the 5th
Lancashire Fusiliers, moving into Brigade Reserve in Gorre. “C” Company
occupied the Tuning Fork Line, immediately North of La Bassée Canal.
“D” Company took over the Village Line with two Platoons at Pont Fixe,
and two Platoons at Windy Corner. Battalion Headquarters and “A” and
“B” Companies being in Brigade Reserve in Gorre. The Companies engaged
in cleaning up and refitting, also visiting the Divisional Baths at
Beuvry. After over a week’s perfect weather rain began to fall. At
11.15 a.m. on the 31st March, Church Parade was held at the Château
Gorre.

[Sidenote: _April, 1918_]

On the 1st April, Companies moved up independently, via the northern
bank of La Bassée Canal to Pont Fixe, to relieve the 4th Loyals in the
right sector of the Brigade Front on La Bassée Canal. The relief was
completed at 11.15 p.m. without incident, the weather being fine, and
the night quiet. Dispositions were: Right Front “A” Company; Centre
“B” Company; Left Front “C” Company; with “D” Company in support in
Givenchy Keeps. Battalion Headquarters were in the Village Line. On the
night of the 4th April our Patrols entered the enemy front line and
communication trenches without any opposition. Good work on this patrol
was done by Second-Lieuts. Raeside, Lyon and Holmes. These patrols
again entered the enemy lines on the nights of the 5th and 6th. They
penetrated as far as the support line, and found the system unoccupied
from the Canal to a point N.E. of Warlingham Crater. A raid which
should have been undertaken by the 4th Loyals was cancelled, owing to
information gained by our Patrols. The 8th was a very quiet day. Not a
shell fell on the Brigade front. “D” Company in the Keeps relieved “C”
Company on the left front.

On the morning of the 9th April there was a heavy fog. The enemy opened
a bombardment with gas shells, and a few 4.2’s and 5.9’s, behind
our front line. Gradually gas shelling decreased, and the volume of
heavier shells increased, the front line receiving some attention.
The following brief summary of events, altogether inadequate to the
occasion, must unhappily suffice to give some indication of the
historic stand now made by the 55th (West Lancashire) Division, against
what was to be the last main despairing effort of a formidable enemy to
overwhelm his opponent:--

_7.30 a.m._--Our front line was destroyed by Minenwerfers, and
shelling was very heavy on Oxford Terrace and Bayswater.

_8.5 a.m._--Battalion Headquarters was very heavily shelled, and
caused serious casualties to Headquarters, Runners and Pioneers.

_9.30 a.m._--An “S.O.S.” was received by Runner from Canal North,
despatched at 9.15 by Captain Ellwood. This was transmitted by power
buzzer, and also by Runner, to the forward guns, and to Brigade.

_10.30 a.m._--Bayswater from Cheyne Walk to 100 yards north were
held by us. 5th Lancashire Fusiliers from Support reached the Village
Line. One Platoon of “C” Company, 5th Lancashire Fusiliers reinforced
main line of resistance. “D” Company, 5th Lancashire Fusiliers formed a
defensive flank at Windy Corner, where the enemy had broken through the
Portuguese Division on our left as anticipated. The enemy was prevented
from penetrating west of Pont Pike--Windy Corner.

_10.50 a.m._--“A” Company were back at Spoil Bank, and re-took
Company Headquarters and Cheyne Walk to beyond Bayswater. Bayswater was
cleared by bombing, and Death or Glory Sap was still holding out.

_10.55 a.m._--Mairie Redoubt was still intact, and Gunner Siding
N. held, the enemy being bombed out of Gunner Siding S. towards Orchard
Road. We were in touch with the 4th Loyals on our left.

_11.20 a.m._--No sign of enemy at Mairie Redoubt. Our right
Company was in touch with 5th Lancashire Fusiliers in Bayswater, who
bombed up Orchard Road.

_12.5 p.m._--Enemy holding top of Orchard Road and firing machine
guns across Spoil Bank.

_12.15 p.m._--We took 14 prisoners in Death or Glory Sap.

_12.55 p.m._--Enemy still in Orchard Keep.

_3 p.m._--Enemy in Company Headquarters, in Oxford Terrace, Gunner
Trench cleared by Captain Evans and Captain Overton.

_3.20 p.m._--Company Headquarters in Oxford Terrace re-taken, and
enemy cleared from Bayswater and Oxford Terrace.

_3.35 p.m._--Enemy cleared from Orchard Keep.

_4 p.m._--Enemy cleared from Cheyne Walk, Bayswater and Spoil
Bank. Oxford and Cambridge Terrace reported all clear. Reorganization
of Keeps in progress.

_4.50 p.m._--Arrival of 2 Officers and 50 other ranks, details of
other Units, as reinforcements.

_4.55 p.m._--Situation on Battalion front: “A” Company in
occupation of Bayswater and Death or Glory Sap. “B” Company in
occupation of Bayswater (with 17 other ranks). “C” Company in
occupation of Oxford Terrace (with one attached Platoon of 5th
Lancashire Fusiliers), Mairie Redoubt, Gunner Siding and Orchard Keep.
“D” Company in occupation of Cambridge Terrace to Wolfe Road. Enemy in
occupation of Warlingham Crater and Lower Finchley Road.

_5 p.m._--One Company of 5th South Lancashire Regiment (Captain
Hill) arrives, and is divided between “A” and “C” Companies.

_7.20 p.m._--Mairie Redoubt, Orchard Keep, and Gunner Siding
normally held by us.

_April 10th, 12.30 a.m._--Our original line now held intact. A
Patrol of the right front Company reports no enemy movement in No
Man’s Land or enemy front line trenches. The night was quiet, with no
Artillery fire, and little machine gun fire.

_9.40 a.m._--Enemy Aeroplane No. 18 dropped a bomb on Bayswater,
wounding 14 of “A” Company. Our low-flying planes fired into enemy
trenches. During the afternoon the enemy shelled Windy Corner--Pont
Fixe very heavily with 4·2, 5·9, and 8-in. (or 11-in.) shells.
Observation of movement behind the enemy lines leads to expectation of
another hostile attack. We opened a harassing Artillery and Machine Gun
fire on the enemy front line, which continued until 9 p.m. and then
slackened.

_11th April._--Patrols out during the night of 10th/11th April
reported no hostile occupation of No Man’s Land, and no sound of
movement of troops. There was no enemy activity during the night,
beyond occasional long bursts of machine gun fire from Embankment
Redoubt and from North East. The afternoon was quiet, but there was a
violent bombardment of Le Plantin in the evening.

_11.10 p.m._--Relief of “D” Company in the left Sector, by
“C” Coy. in the Keeps, was reported complete, but this relief was
considerably delayed by shell fire.

_12th April, 9.30 a.m._--The Brigade Major visited Battalion
Headquarters and issued verbal orders for the relief of the Battalion
in the Line, by the 5th Lancashire Fusiliers from the Village Line.
Operation Orders were issued, and reconnaissances of dispositions were
carried out at once.

_1 p.m._--Relief commenced and was successfully carried out by
small parties.

_6.35 p.m._--Relief completed. Dispositions now in the Village
Line were: Pont Fixe, “A” Company (with “D” Company, 5th South
Lancashire Regiment). Fanshawe Castle, “D” and “B” Companies. Windy
Corner, “C” Company. Battalion Headquarters remained unchanged.

_13th April._--The enemy bombarded the Village Line during the
day, and the work of wiring the northern flank between Windy Corner and
Lone Farm commenced.

_14th April, 4.45 p.m._--The Windy Corner defences were taken over
from “C” Company, by a Company of the 5th South Lancashire Regiment.
Information was received of the forthcoming relief of the Brigade by
the 1st Brigade.

_15th April._--Preparations for relief by the 1st Camerons.

_16th April, 11 a.m._--Lewis Gun Teams of the 1st Camerons arrived
at Westminster Bridge, and were conducted by guides to Companies.

_10 p.m._--Relieving Companies met at Westminster Bridge.

_11.15 p.m._--Relief completed without incident. Enemy Artillery
was quiet during the relief. Companies proceeded independently to
a point on the Beuvry--Béthune Road, where buses were waiting to
convey them to their destination. During this operation a dozen 5·9
shells fell in the vicinity, but had no effect beyond accelerating
the departure of the convoy. The Company of the 5th South Lancashire
Regiment left us here, and proceeded to Burbure.

One episode in this outstanding engagement may be commented on. Orchard
Keep--a key position--was occupied by 2nd Lieut. J. H. Collin and
sixteen Non-Commissioned Officers and men, who held the post until
overwhelmed by successive attacks by the Germans. The whole of this
party were reported killed, but Lance-Corporal J. Pollitt was wounded
and taken prisoner. Badly wounded as he was, this N.C.O. killed his
escort, and fought his way back alone to our lines. The defence of
Orchard Keep made such an impression on the Higher Command that 2nd
Lieut. J. H. Collin was awarded the posthumous Victoria Cross (see
Appendix). It therefore seems reasonable to assume that Lance-Corpl.
Pollitt, as the only survivor of this very gallant band, was an
unlucky victim of the fortune of war, in that he received no official
recognition of his valuable services on this and other occasions. It
is interesting too, that Lance-Corpl. Pollitt was associated with the
events which led to the grant of the two Victoria Crosses previously
earned by the Battalion.

The Battalion arrived in billets in Marles-les-Mines at 4 a.m. on the
17th. These billets were comfortable and much appreciated. The usual
daily parades followed, and these included bathing parades to Auchel,
and visits to the 55th Divisional Theatre at the same village. On the
21st April at 10 a.m., the Battalion paraded and marched, accompanied
by the Band, to the Aerodrome near Auchel, where an inspection of
the Brigade by the Divisional Commander was held. It was anticipated
that the French Premier would be present at this parade, but for some
reason of State, this anticipation was not realised. At 6.30 a.m. on
the 23rd, the Battalion proceeded by bus to Vaudricourt, in the Houchin
area, prior to taking over trenches again. Here, as the weather was
delightfully sunny, the day was spent agreeably in the woods. In the
evening two Companies moved off by the light railway, to relieve the
1st Battalion The Loyals in the Givenchy Sector, while two Companies
and Battalion Headquarters moved up by bus. Headquarters sustained
10 casualties through Artillery fire, when alighting near Annequin.
Dispositions were as follows: Right Sector, La Bassée Canal; on the
right, “A” Company; centre, “B” Company; left, “C” Company, with “D”
Company in support. The Transport moved to the Château Drouvin.

Two of our fighting patrols, which went out just after dark on the
25th, to occupy the junction of Orchard Road and front line, to the
junction of Finchley Road and front line, met the enemy in force,
became heavily engaged, and were driven back. Second-Lieuts. Sykes and
Whitmore were wounded. A barrage was put down to enable a third party
to rush this line. The barrage came down in No Man’s Land, behind
the objective, and our men could not advance against hostile machine
gun fire. Several casualties were sustained. The enemy were holding
our old front line in strength. At 4 a.m. on the 26th April, covered
by Artillery fire, two platoons of “A” and “D” Companies rushed the
enemy position, and heavy hand-to-hand fighting ensued. Our party was
forced to withdraw. At 2.20 p.m., under cover of Artillery fire and
Machine Gun barrage, two Platoons of “C” and “D” Companies attempted,
in conjunction with 5th Lancashire Fusiliers to retake the crater saps
on our left. The barrage did not come down on “K” and “J” Saps, and
the Lancashire Fusiliers were unable to reach their objectives. The
4th King’s Own reached their objectives after fierce fighting, during
which 40 German prisoners were taken. Parties of “C” Company, under
Second-Lieut. Hunter, on the left, quickly cleared Berkeley Street,
“E” Sap, and front line. Parties of “D” Company, under Second-Lieut.
Stewart, on the right, rushed from Coventry Sap and took “A” Sap, also
obtaining touch with “C” Company. Second-Lieut. Hunter was killed
after these objectives were reached. Touch was established with the 5th
Lancashire Fusiliers but the latter were driven from their positions
by strong enemy counter-attacks. Our own posts became surrounded on
three sides, and we were forced to give ground. After bitter fighting
we accomplished a successful withdrawal to our former lines, after
inflicting heavy losses on the enemy. Congratulations were received
from Corps, Division, and Brigade Commanders on the fine fighting
qualities displayed.

[Sidenote: _April–May, 1918_]

On the 28th April we were relieved by the 4th Loyals, and went into
support in the Village Line, Battalion Headquarters being in Fanshawe
Castle; “B” and “D” Companies in Canal Bank; “A” Company in Pont Fixe,
and “C” Company, Windy Corner. The 7th King’s Liverpool Regt. relieved
us on the night of the 1st May, and we went into Brigade Reserve in
Verquigneul, where re-clothing, refitting and bathing was carried out.
Reinforcements joined us and Companies were reorganized. The Divisional
Commander inspected and interviewed parties of “C” and “D” Companies
who took part in the recent attack on the Crater Saps. Platoon and
Company training were also carried out. On the 8th May preparations
were made for going up into the line. 2 Officers and 135 other ranks
proceeded by march route to Allouagne, to Corps Reinforcement Depot, as
“B” Team. At 7.30 p.m. the march to the trenches by platoons commenced.
We relieved the 5th King’s Liverpool Regt. in the Givenchy Right
Sector, Left Sub-Sector. The relief was completed at 1.40 a.m. on the
9th without incident. Dispositions were as follows: left front, “A”
Company; centre, “D” Company; right front, “B” Company; “C” Company in
support in the Keeps. There was much enemy activity during this tour of
duty in the trenches, especially by his Artillery, and also in the air.
On the 14th May a low flying aeroplane was engaged by our machine guns,
and shortly afterwards the enemy’s artillery, searching from Pont Fixe
to Windy Corner, succeeded in blowing up an ammunition store at the
latter post.

[Sidenote: _May–August, 1918_]

Such was the general position at this time. Outwardly, the course of
events, for the next three or four months, followed the same routine.
Life alternated between the trenches at Givenchy, and Reserve at
Drouvin Camp. It is earnestly hoped that a cursory glance at the period
under review, will not convey the impression that nothing worthy
of note was happening. Far from it; but a closer analysis would be
a repetition of what has already been presented to the reader. The
Battalion underwent its usual hazardous tour of duty in the trenches,
and close proximity to the enemy could never be uneventful. It will be
recalled that during the strong attack by the Germans on April 9th, we
were compelled to retire slightly from our old front line, and this had
since been occupied by the enemy. This line was accordingly re-occupied
by our troops, and a great quantity of salvage was found and brought
down.

The spirit which now prevailed amongst our troops was restrained
optimism. This feeling had an intangible quality, gossamer in texture,
more tacit than expressed, but everywhere radiating good cheer, and
hope for the near future. The power of the enemy’s attack appeared to
have been definitely broken, while the time was approaching when our
own irresistible advance was to reach a triumphant conclusion.

On the 21st August, at Vaudricourt, we listened to a lecture by
Brigadier-General G. I. Stockwell, telling us about, and explaining a
secret attack on the Craters, to be carried out by the 5th Lancashire
Fusiliers and ourselves, and Officers and N.C.O.s studied a model of
the Craters. The following day this lecture was repeated to the men
by Company Commanders. Preparations for the coming attack were made,
and great keenness was shewn. On the 23rd August we moved up the line
to assembly positions, with Headquarters in the Givenchy Tunnel. The
Battalion was very busy making final arrangements.

[Sidenote: _August, 1918_]

At 2.20 a.m. on the morning of the 24th August, all Companies were in
assembly positions. Despite a very slight harassing fire no casualties
were sustained. Wire cutting had previously been carried out by advance
parties. The enemy was very quiet, sent up few lights, and showed no
signs of anticipating an attack. Supporting Companies received hot
breakfasts, and the assembling troops had sandwiches and chocolate. No
noise was made in getting up food. Snipers crept out to position on
spoil heaps, from which they kept down enemy observation prior to the
attack, and kept down enemy fire during the attack, by firing on such
targets as exposed themselves.

At 6 a.m. visibility became very poor, a slight rain falling. Our own
Stokes Mortars fired intermittently on the crater areas up to the
time when the rockets were fired at zero hour. One of our aeroplanes
flew low over the craters, drawing only a very slight machine gun
fire. On the firing of the rockets at 7.20 a.m., the assaulting troops
immediately advanced under splendid leadership. Two and a half minutes
elapsed before the enemy fired his first rifle shot. There was no
artillery fire at all. The enemy was completely taken by surprise, and
was found mostly in dugouts. Not a single enemy machine gun was in
action on the Battalion front. At 7.24 a.m. an S.O.S. rocket, bursting
into two red lights, was fired from well behind the enemy’s lines.
Meanwhile, mopping up parties had followed closely behind the front
line of sections, but found the enemy to be in small strength. These
were effectively dealt with, some being killed and some being taken
prisoner. A few tried to run away but were heavily fired on.

At 7.30 a.m. our own protective barrage fell beyond the crater
area, this being answered three minutes later by a poor counter
barrage directed chiefly on Gunner Siding. At 7.35 a.m. Companies
had reached their objectives on the far lip of the craters, and
telephone communication was established between them and Battalion
Headquarters. At 7.43 a.m. consolidation was immediately proceeded
with. Up to this time casualties were practically nil. Patrols were
sent out to deal with Trench Mortar emplacements, and one was reported
destroyed by mobile charge by the Left Company. Our own barrage, which
was very heavy, seems to have dropped some shells short, inflicting
casualties, two men being killed and 8 wounded in the Left Company, and
approximately the same number in the Right Company.

Enemy retaliation dwindled down to very slight proportions between
8.30 and 10.30 a.m. He did not appear to know on what points to fire.
At 8.34 a.m. a message was received from the snipers that a party
of nearly forty of the enemy were seen at the far end of Duck Bill
extension. These were fired on and soon disappeared. Shortly afterwards
news was received from the Australian Tunnellers to the effect that
there were no mines in dugouts, and that all shelters were badly
smashed, a pill-box in Red Dragon Crater alone being untouched. Parties
of the enemy in small numbers were seen running to the rear, and were
dealt with by Lewis Gunners and Snipers, those escaping getting right
into our barrage. At 9.20 a.m. consolidation was reported to be making
good progress, while communication trenches were being rapidly dug by
Pioneers, from Wolfe Road to Berkeley Street.

At 9.40 a.m. an S.O.S. rocket was sent up from the area of the left
Battalion. Enemy Artillery was not firing at all at the time. Five
minutes later the S.O.S. was cancelled.

Shortly afterwards the enemy fired on the crater area for the first
time, on Warlinghem. Owing to our own Artillery fire some patrols had
difficulty in reaching Trench Mortar emplacements, and these were now
sent out again. The Right Company reported reaching an emplacement, but
found the Mortar gone, though plenty of very heavy ammunition, and a
range finder were lying near. The Left Company reported the destruction
of another emplacement.

Between 11 and 11.15 a.m. enemy Artillery became much more active, blue
cross shells falling on Givenchy, and the gas drifting over our area.
This had cleared by 11.45 a.m. From this time onwards, much heavier
enemy barrages were put down on the crater area. Tea and sandwiches
were got up to the front line troops about 12.30 p.m., and about an
hour later, a hot meat meal. Considerable difficulty was experienced in
getting rations over the broken ground to the crater area, and the work
done by the Transport and Quarter-Master’s Department was commendable.
Perhaps a smile may be permitted here. This devoted personnel, its duty
well and truly done, assembled for departure from the inhospitable
region of the craters, which the Hun was now freely shelling. One
member of the party was missing, and he the Company Quarter-Master
Sergeant. Impatience grew as the minutes passed, and when well nigh
insupportable, he appeared, to meet the indignant queries of his
comrades, he silenced criticism with the explanation “Well, I couldn’t
find t’ dixie lid”!

Our casualties during these operations amounted to 30, viz.: 7 killed
and 23 wounded. On the 25th and 26th August the new line was organized.
Difficulty was experienced by our Patrols in getting into touch with
the enemy, and it was not until the second day that his posts were
found. Our Snipers did excellent work, getting three confirmed hits,
and continually harassing the enemy in his broken communication
trenches. On the 27th we were relieved by the 5th King’s Liverpool
Regt. without incident, and went into billets at Drovbin Camp, arriving
shortly after 9 p.m.

[Sidenote: _Aug.–Sept., 1918_]

News of a German retirement on the front of the 15th Division, reached
Battalion Headquarters astride La Bassée Canal, at 10 a.m. on the 2nd
October. In consequence of this information, daylight patrols were sent
out by “A” and “B” Companies, these Companies holding the right half of
the Brigade Outpost Line. The advanced Platoons of “B” Company, under
Lieut. Peers, were, on this morning, occupying Canteleux Trench, from
its junction with Canteleux Alley S., to Towpath Alley, with forward
posts in shell holes. “A” Company, to the south of the Canal, had taken
over, the previous evening, the dispositions of three Companies of the
4th Loyals, who had captured the Distillery, viz., a line of posts 200
yards East of the Distillery Line, with supporting and counter-attack
platoons in rear. The two counter-attack platoons were attached from
“D” Company.

[Sidenote: _October, 1918_]

Progress was first made by “B” Company, one of whose patrols had
entered La Bassée Line before mid-day. By 1.30 p.m. the western
outskirts of La Bassée were reached, and at 2 p.m. patrols were pushing
North up the front and support trenches of La Bassée line, to gain
touch with the 5th Lancashire Fusiliers who were advancing towards La
Bassée from the direction of Canteleux and Violaines. Opposite their
front, however, the enemy seemed to hold his line normally, until
mid-day, and even later.

Shortly after 1 o’clock, Lieut. Rudall (“A” Company) had entered
without opposition, La Bassée line S. of the Canal, and was pushing S.
down the trench to gain touch with patrols which were working their way
along Vert Alley. At 2.30 we were in occupation of La Bassée line, from
the Canal to Vert Alley, and had gained touch with the 16th Division.
Instructions were then received from the Brigadier-General Commanding
164th Infantry Brigade to hold La Bassée Line with two Platoons, and
push into Le Faubourg to Canal Basin and Crassiers. Meantime patrols
of “B” Company had pushed through La Bassée, and reached at 4.30
p.m., a point 800 yards East of it. Major R. Gardner, M.C., under
whose command this advance guard was operating, then left Battalion
Headquarters at Spoil Bank, and at 5 p.m. established Headquarters of
the Right Advance Guard at the Distillery. He was accompanied by Lieut.
Tucker (Intelligence Officer), and by a few Signallers and Runners.
Communications with Spoil Bank were at first maintained by telephone,
via one of the other Company Headquarters. On the establishment of
Battalion Headquarters at Canteleux at 7 p.m., communications became
very precarious, as the wire over the Canal became “dissed” by the
blowing up of a barge. A “loop set,” however, was fixed up at the
Distillery, with which efforts were made to get into touch with a
similar instalment in Red Dragon Crater. Telephone communication,
however, with the Company Headquarters already referred to, was
maintained.

Patrols had by 5 o’clock, reached Crassiers, and located the enemy.
Patrols elsewhere were also pushing on, in touch with the 16th
Division. Two Platoons from “B” Company then crossed the Canal, and
were disposed in La Bassée Line, which was temporarily held as the
main line of resistance. By 8 p.m. outposts were established along
an advanced line, and Vanguard Headquarters were in La Bassée, in a
concrete cellar. From a reconnaissance of the Canal it was observed
that the bridges had been totally destroyed. It was, however, just
possible to scramble over near the remains of the old railway
bridge. There was no sign of any footbridge along the Canal. Road
reconnaissance showed that the main Annequin--La Bassée road was fit
for horse and motor traffic as far as Le Faubourg. Roads towards Canal
Basin from Le Faubourg were also good for horse traffic; that running
south towards Cité de Douvrin was not so good.

The only opposition to our Patrols came from a machine gun. This,
however, ceased before dusk, and a party of 20 of the enemy were
seen marching thence towards Salomé in full marching order. Before
midnight a post was established in the Old Brewery on the Salomé Road,
and another south of the Canal. Detachments of Machine Gunners (55th
Division Machine Gun Battalion, 4 Guns; 16th Division Machine Gun
Battalion, 2 Guns), Stokes Mortars, Lewis Gunners, and Investigation
Parties had all reported at Advanced Guard Headquarters at the
Distillery by 8 p.m. About midnight two patrols were sent out to push
forward into Salomé, one along the N. and the other along the S. side
of the Canal, and establish a post in Salomé, in touch with each other.
These posts were established by 2 a.m. on the 3rd October. A patrol
also went down the road to gain touch with the Division on the right.

Salomé was found deserted--the enemy had completely disappeared--and
touch was gained with a patrol of the 5th Lancashire Fusiliers in
Salomé. At 7 a.m. the line of resistance of the Advance Guard was
moved forward to a general line, with forward posts and two supporting
platoons. A patrol reached the Canal angle, and further patrols were
sent to reconnoitre Berclau. Billy Berclau was found to have been
reached by the 16th Division, and touch was established with their left
post. At 10.55 a.m. Billy Berclau was lightly shelled by the enemy,
and at the same time Machine Gun and Anti-Aircraft Artillery fire was
observed from Berclau. Advance Guard Headquarters was established
near the Canal Basin, whither the “loop set” from the Distillery was
removed. This was picked up by the “loop set” of the forward Brigade,
and communication with our Brigade was thus obtained. In other
directions visual signalling was resorted to.

Four machine guns were disposed in the main line of resistance, 2 were
maintained in reserve at Headquarters. One Stokes Mortar was also
conveyed by mule to the Vanguard Headquarters. A forward dump of 57
boxes of small arm ammunition was established in rear of the main line
of resistance. Cooking was done in La Bassée, and the men supplied with
hot food during the day. Cross-country communications from La Bassée to
the outpost line of resistance was easy, the tracks being undamaged.
At 1 p.m. a post was reported established in Berclau, but later an
enemy rearguard was located in another part of the village. Fighting
took place, and our post was compelled to withdraw. The N. and N.E.
outskirts of Berclau were found strongly held by machine guns and
snipers. We established a Lewis Gun Post which commanded Berclau.

At 4.45 p.m. orders were received from Brigade to arrange for the 16th
Division to take over the dispositions of the Right Advance Guard,
owing to a change of boundaries. The southern boundary of our Brigade
was fixed on the line of the Canal--Canal Angle--Canal Tee. The Advance
Guard, and all attached troops were to move to assembly positions in
Salomé, N. of the Canal, and await the remainder of the 4th King’s
Own, which was coming up from La Bassée, to relieve the 5th Lancashire
Fusiliers in the Brigade Outpost line, on the night of the 3rd/4th
October, and to continue the advance on the morning of the 4th. At 7.30
p.m. Advance Guard Headquarters closed and crossed the Canal. Major R.
Gardner, M.C., the Commander, reported at Battalion Headquarters in
Salomé at 9 p.m. The outpost platoons and attached troops crossed the
Canal, and spent the night in billets in Salomé. The whole Battalion,
under the command of Lieut.-Colonel G. B. Balfour, D.S.O., now acted as
Advance Guard to the Brigade.

On the morning of the 4th October, patrols pushed forward at dawn from
Hantay, and drove the enemy back to the Canal. A good deal of patrol
fighting took place. “D” Company attacked and took Prevore Farm. The
enemy held the western bank of the Canal and bridgeheads with machine
guns. The 18-pr. Battery attached to the Advance Guard, shelled the
bridgeheads and the Laundry. On the 5th October, patrols continued to
drive the enemy back, but could not get across the Haute Deule Canal,
which he was holding strongly. The enemy flooded the area in front
of the Canal, and caused our patrols and posts to withdraw a short
distance. The Battalion was relieved during the night by the 6th King’s
Liverpools and marched back to Divisional Reserve in the vicinity of
Pont Fixe and Givenchy, with Battalion Headquarters at Barge House.
Here we rested, bathed and refitted. The weather was wet, and there
were no working parties. Companies were not very comfortable in
dugouts, and on the 7th the Battalion moved back to billets in Beuvry.
Here training in Advance Guards was carried out, and kits and stores
were again reduced to the lowest minimum, so as to conform to the
transport available.

On the 11th October one Officer per Company reconnoitred the left
Brigade front (166th Brigade), with a view to taking over the following
day. A demonstration in rapid pontoon bridging was given in the
afternoon. This followed a lecture in the morning by the Divisional
Educational Officer on the scheme for education _on the cessation of
hostilities_. This encouraged impressions not to be ignored, and
if the general spirit of the troops was exuberant, it was based on
solid foundation and not mere flimsy excuse. Much remained to be done,
however, and on the 12th October the Battalion left Beuvry in trains at
8.30 a.m. to relieve the 10th Liverpool Scottish in the forward area.
There were two collisions on the way but no one was hurt. We detrained
at Cambrin, and marched to the neighbourhood of Marquillies, where
Battalion Headquarters were established. “A” Company in Marquillies;
“B” Company in Sainghin; “C” Company in Le Willy, and “D” Company in
the Sugar Factory. Relief was completed at 5 p.m. without any special
incident.

On the following day posts were dug and wired all round. There was a
good deal of shelling but no casualties were sustained. On the 14th,
Battalion Headquarters moved to a house near the Sugar Factory. Two
Companies were in the main line of resistance, and two in support. We
supplied one working party, and Officers reconnoitred the forward area.

On the 17th the Battalion left Sainghin, moving off at 9 a.m., and
marched by Companies through Wavrin to Lattre. There was some delay in
crossing the Canal at Seclin, owing to the bridges being blown up. We
then moved on to Ancoisne, where a mid-day meal was served. Here we
met the first released civilians, and our reception was most cordial.
About 2 p.m. the Battalion moved on to Houplines, and were still under
orders to advance. At 6.30 p.m. we arrived at Templemars, remaining
there for the night. Our reception here was even more cordial than
before. Battalion Headquarters were established at the Mayor’s house.
At 6 a.m. on the 18th, the Battalion moved off to pass through the
5th Lancashire Fusiliers. “C” and “D” were Outpost Companies, with
“A” and “B” Companies in support. The patrols pushed on and entered
Peronne. The enemy were holding the bank of the river La Marque in
considerable strength, and there was a good deal of shelling, the fort
at Sainghin, and Peronne, being the chief targets. Bas Sainghin caused
“D” Company a good deal of trouble, and it was not until the afternoon
that it was cleared. A heavy mist hung over the area of operations,
and greatly assisted us in moving forward. The night was very light,
with a brilliant moon. By means of a ladder, “D” Company patrol was
able to cross La Marque, and enter Bouvines. At 10.30 p.m. we put down
a machine gun barrage, also our 18-pr. Batteries fired on woods where
the enemy were located. This seems to have forced the enemy to retire
before he intended, and he finally left the village at 11.15 p.m. Our
reception by the villagers was most cordial.

On the 19th October, the whole Outpost Line pushed out, and by the
early morning our line was established on the railway line east of
Bouvines, and patrols had entered Cysoing. The 4th Loyals now passed
through us, and our Battalion concentrated in Bouvines for a rest.
During the early morning “B” Company had captured 23 prisoners and
3 machine guns. Headquarters were established in a Château, and
everyone was very comfortable. The villagers were overjoyed at their
deliverance, and did all they could to make the troops comfortable. The
bridge across the river had been blown up, and the villagers helped the
Royal Engineers to build a new one, which was completed by 11.30 a.m.

The Battalion left Bouvines at 8.30 a.m. on the 20th to take over
the role of “B” Battalion. We passed through Cysoing at 10 a.m.
and marched to Creplain, where we halted. The Battalion then moved
on again to the area around the Ferme du Baron, north of Froidmont,
where we again halted and awaited orders. The next move was to a field
about 800 yards north of Esplechin, where we formed up into Artillery
formation. “D” Company was sent to support the left flank of the 5th
Lancashire Fusiliers, and one Platoon to obtain touch with the 74th
Division on our left. At 6 p.m. Battalion Headquarters moved to a farm
in Esplechin, and “A” and “B” Companies moved to support the right
flank of the 5th Lancashire Fusiliers. The remaining three Platoons of
“C” Company moved to the left, and joined “D” Company, thus the whole
Battalion was now in the Support Line. Battalion Headquarters moved
to the Asylum in Froidmont, and were cordially greeted by the jovial
Brothers of Charity.

On the 21st October, the Battalion passed through the 5th Lancashire
Fusiliers, but found progress well contested by the enemy. Severe
patrol fighting took place. The high ground on the road from Froidmont
to Tournai was captured by “B” Company at 3.15 p.m., but was re-taken
by the enemy at 10 p.m. On the right, considerable opposition was met
with in Ere, and a machine gun was located, firing from the Church. The
Church itself was mined. The enemy were finally pushed beyond Ere, and
we took up a line about 500 yards beyond the village. Ere was heavily
shelled during the day and night. At 7 p.m. Headquarters moved to the
Château near Ere, and an advanced Headquarters was established in
Ere. The enemy appeared to be making a stand on the north side of the
river Scheldt. The shelling was severe, and all the sunken roads were
marked down for harassing fire. During the morning of the 22nd, the 5th
Loyals took over our line, and the Battalion took over a battle line in
support. “D” Company had some casualties when coming out of the Outpost
Line. The Battalion rested during the day. “A” Company were gassed
rather heavily at 6 p.m., but suffered no casualties.

On the 23rd October the Battalion was holding the Battle Line, the men
being as far as possible in farm houses, within easy reach of posts
to be manned in case of S.O.S. At 4.45 p.m., in conjunction with the
14th Black Watch (late Fife and Forfar Yeomanry), one platoon of “D”
Company attacked a sunken road, but without success. Enemy machine gun
fire was very intense, and the men could only advance to within 100
yards of the trench, when the Officer and 5 men were wounded. The men
were collected together by the Platoon Sergeant, and formed posts on
the eastern edge of a wood, about 150 yards from the objective. The
remainder of the Battalion were making posts. On the 24th Companies
were engaged in digging V-shaped trenches, about 40 yards long, and
these were inspected by the Commanding Officer during the morning. This
work was carried out until 2 a.m. on the 25th, when 15 such trenches
had been completed. Battalion Headquarters were moved to the farm house
Du Baron during the afternoon, and Companies were billeted in farms in
the vicinity.

During the morning of the 25th October, “D” Company (Reserve Company)
carried on with the construction of the trenches. The Battalion was
relieved in the main line of resistance about 5 p.m. by the 4th Loyals,
and, on relief, moved forward and relieved the 5th Lancashire Fusiliers
in the Outpost Line. Battalion Headquarters were established in the
Tannery. “B” and “C” Companies held the front line, with “A” and “D”
Companies in support. Second-Lieut. A. Rigg was here wounded in the
leg by a machine gun bullet. The Battalion and the 4th Loyals now
became attached to the 165th Infantry Brigade. On the 26th October
the Battalion had the misfortune to lose the further services of the
Commanding Officer, Lieut.-Colonel G. B. Balfour, D.S.O., who, along
with Lieut. H. Tucker, went to hospital, sick. Colonel Balfour had the
distinguished honour of serving with the Battalion throughout the War,
from the time when he mobilised as a Lieutenant in August, 1914. The
Command of the Battalion devolved upon Major R. Gardner, M.C., who was
promoted Acting Lieut.-Colonel, and who himself had proceeded to France
with the Battalion and had rendered most valuable service.

Ere Church and vicinity were continually harassed during the day with
gas shells and whizbangs. An aeroplane, belonging to “C” Flight, was
shot down, but was salvaged intact from No Man’s Land by “A” Company.
During the morning another of our aeroplanes was forced to land, with a
bullet through the tank, near Pic-au-Vent, the pilot and observer being
uninjured. On the whole, the Battalion had a quiet day.

At 5.30 a.m. on the 27th the Royal Air Force took away in a lorry the
first aeroplane we salvaged the previous day. During the morning there
was a slight gas shelling of Pic-au-Vent, Croix-de-Pierre, and Ere
Church, but the Battalion had a quiet day in the Line. On the 29th an
enemy aeroplane was brought down on the right of the Battalion front.
The observer was seen to descend by means of a parachute, and was taken
prisoner by the 10th Liverpool Scottish on the right. The Battalion
had a quiet day in the Line, and was relieved at 7.30 p.m. by the 6th
King’s Liverpool Regt. On relief, the Battalion proceeded to billets in
Bourchelles. Here the opportunity was taken of cleaning up, paying the
men, and bathing at Cysoing. Succeeding days were devoted to training
in open warfare, and Colonel Gardner addressed the Battalion on the
parade ground. Capt. A. E. Morton, M.C., Lieuts. H. Lauder and Steeple,
and Second-Lieut. I. G. Anderson rejoined the Battalion here, whilst
by way of recreation, a dance was given in the village school, with
the Battalion Band in attendance, and which proved very popular. There
were also some fine Cinema shows given in the same building from time
to time. The weather was not too kind at this time, rain being rather
persistent.

[Sidenote: _November, 1918_]

On the 8th November, the Battalion received orders to be prepared
to move at short notice, and everything was prepared in readiness
for this, the remainder of the day being devoted to training in
billets, the day being very wet. At 1 a.m. on the 9th we received
orders to move to Esplechin, and at 9.50 a.m. the Battalion proceeded
to that village by march route, arriving at 11.30 a.m., and now
came under the orders of the 166th Infantry Brigade. On the 10th
November, at 5.30 a.m., we received orders to move forward towards
Leuze, and proceeded by march route at 6.45 a.m. The route taken was
via Froidmont--Ere--Pontrieu--Vaulx--Les Tournai, along the main
Tournai--Ath Road to Leuze, where the Battalion arrived at 7 p.m.
Progress on the march was considerably delayed, owing to the main road
being blown up by mines in many places. We found good billets in Leuze,
and were very comfortable for the night, the inhabitants giving the
Battalion a most cordial reception. We received orders from the 166th
Infantry Brigade to move forward next morning at 11 a.m.

At 10.45 a.m. on the 11th November, the Battalion formed up in mass
on the Square at Leuze, preparatory to moving forward. A few minutes
before 11 o’clock the Commanding Officer, Lieut.-Colonel R. Gardner,
M.C., read out on parade, a telegram, received from the 166th Infantry
Brigade, stating that an Armistice had been signed by Germany, and
that hostilities would cease at 11 a.m. A Squadron of the 1st Royal
Dragoons, being then in Leuze, on their way forward, also formed up in
the Square, and at 11 o’clock sounded the Cavalry “Cease Fire.” The
Battalion then gave a Royal Salute, and the Band played the National
Anthems of England, Belgium, and France. We then moved forward, amid
great cheering from the civilian population, and proceeded along the
main road to Ligne, where a halt was made, and the Battalion had lunch.
Orders were received here from the 164th Infantry Brigade to proceed to
Villers St. Amand, where we duly arrived about 2.45 p.m. Billets were
obtained, and the Battalion rested here for the night, coming again
under the orders of the 164th Infantry Brigade.




                              CHAPTER IX.

                              CONCLUSION.


[Sidenote: _Nov.–Dec., 1918_]

Little remains to be told. The great conflict was over, with
overwhelming victory on our side. What followed might have been of
importance and interest in the ordinary peace time experience of the
Battalion but, after its searching test of the past four years, current
events assumed the complexion of the commonplace and even dull. What
will always remain of imperishable importance and interest, is that the
Battalion emerged from its trials with jealously guarded reputation
untarnished, and fit to hand on to successors, as an incentive to
maintain the high standard of the 4th King’s Own Royal Regt.

On Sunday, 17th November, 8 Officers attended a solemn Te Deum in
Ath, and the Battalion took part in a combined Church of England
and Nonconformist Thanksgiving Service. On the 18th we moved to
Chappelle-a-Wattines, and became attached to the 271st Company R.E.,
for work on stripping railways. This was varied by football and
organized games, concerts, and liberal leave to visit Ath. On the
7th December a Guard of Honour was furnished to mark the passing of
His Majesty the King, to whom the Brigadier-General Commanding was
presented. On the 15th December the Battalion left Leuze, and by a
series of marches via Ath--Enghein--Buysinghem, reached Uccle, near
Brussels, where we arrived on the 18th, after a few days’ march.
Christmas Day in Uccle was seasonably marked by attending Church Parade
in the morning. This was followed by the men’s dinner at 1 o’clock,
and the Sergeants’ dinner at 6 o’clock. In the afternoon the Battalion
Football Team played the champion Belgian Team, on the latter’s ground,
the game ending in a draw of 2 goals each. The men enjoyed themselves,
and everybody spent a very happy Christmas Day.

[Sidenote: _Jan.–March, 1919_]

On the 3rd January, 1919, the Division was inspected by the General
Officer Commanding, on the third anniversary of its formation. The
Division was drawn up on the road running through Bois-de-Cambre. The
G.O.C. and Staff rode down the line, and afterwards the Earl of Derby,
K.G., motored slowly over the same course. The Division, led by the
4th King’s Own Regt., as the senior Regiment of the Division, marched
past in fours, the salute being taken by H.M. The King of the Belgians.
The Belgians attending the ceremony were very enthusiastic, especially
when the Colours passed the saluting base. The Colours were carried on
this occasion by Lieut. Tucker and Second-Lieut. Dane, M.C. On the 26th
January, H.M. The King of the Belgians reviewed the III Corps Troops,
to which we belonged. The march through Brussels commenced at the
Avenue Louise, and proceeded to the Place des Palais, where the salute
was taken by King Albert. Their Royal Highnesses The Prince of Wales
and Prince Albert were both present at the ceremony.

Life in and around Brussels at this period was very agreeable. Many
Concerts and Dances were given, and proved most popular. Meanwhile
heavy drafts were being prepared, and despatched to the Army of
Occupation at Bonn, and to England on demobilization. This so reduced
the strength that no training was possible, all the men being employed
in special capacities, and on guard duties. On the 24th February the
Battalion was reorganised as two Companies--the Cadre Company and
the Rhine Draft Company--the total strength being now under 200. The
Regimental Colours were removed from the Officers’ Mess, and handed
over to the Quarter-Master for safe custody. On the 12th March,
Brigadier-General G. I. Stockwell, C.B., C.M.G., D.S.O., relinquished
the Command of the 164th Infantry Brigade, on being appointed
Commandant of the Staff College, Camberley. On the 14th all Officers
attended at Divisional Headquarters to say good-bye to Major-General
Sir Hugh Jeudwine, K.C.B., the Divisional Commander, on his departure
to command the Lancashire Division of the Army of Occupation on the
Rhine. Sir Hugh also made a tour of the Division and said good-bye to
as many as possible of the rank and file.

[Sidenote: _June, 1919_]

Finally, the Cadre Party of the Battalion, composed of Lieut.-Colonel
R. Gardner, M.C., Lieut. T. H. Pritchard, M.C., Lieut. R. W. Higginson,
M.C., and Captain P. W. Powell, M.C., the Quarter-Master, and 24 Other
Ranks, left Brussels early on Saturday morning, June 7th, for England.
They arrived at Ulverston on Wednesday, June 11th, and were met at
the station by the Battalion Band, under Bandmaster F. W. Garnett,
and an enthusiastic concourse of the population. On the following day
there was a Civic ceremony of welcome to the returning troops. This
was attended by Lieut.-Colonel W. F. A. Wadham, V.D., Colonel G. H.
Huthwaite, V.D., Major N. E. Barnes, T.D., Captain R. H. Horne, and
Captain J. Rawlinson, of the late Volunteers. Speeches of welcome
were made by Councillor C. J. Chapman of the Ulverston Urban District
Council, and Alderman Mawson and Alderman Bradshaw, of the Barrow
Municipal Council. A procession was then formed to the Ulverston Parish
Church, and the Colours, carried by Lieuts. Pritchard and Higginson,
were deposited for safe custody in the hands of the Rector, the Rev. J.
Stuart Rimmer, M.A. The Cadre Party then re-formed, and marched back
to the Drill Hall, where some of them had mobilized nearly five years
previously--an event which seemed to belong to a period incredibly
remote.

                                         J. CROSSLEY, _Captain_,

                                  _Late 1/4 King’s Own Royal Regiment_.

ULVERSTON,

    _July, 1935_.




                             APPENDIX “A.”


                             4th Battalion

              The King’s Own (Royal Lancaster Regiment).

        Nominal Roll of Officers Mobilized with the Battalion,
                           4th August, 1914.


    Lieut. Colonel   W. F. A. WADHAM, V.D., Commanding.

    Majors           E. B. POOLEY.
                     R. THOMPSON.

    Captains         N. E. BARNES.
                     G. D. WADHAM.
                     R. P. LITTLE.
                     J. CADDY.
                     W. D. BARRATT.
                     W. G. PEARSON.
                     J. V. BARROW.

    Lieutenants      D. L. MCNAUGHTAN.
                     G. B. BALFOUR.
                     J. S. FOTHERGILL.
                     R. D. MORRELL.
                     J. M. MAWSON.
                     W. H. B. R. KENNEDY.

    2nd Lieutenants  H. Y. HUTHWAITE.
                     A. BEARDSLEY.
                     JOHN FISHER.
                     G. H. WALKER.

    Adjutant         V. A. JACKSON, Captain (York and Lancaster Regt.).

    Medical Officer  A. F. RUTHERFORD, Major, R.A.M.C. (T.F.).




                             APPENDIX “B.”

                             4th Battalion

              The King’s Own (Royal Lancaster Regiment).

           Nominal Roll of Officers who Proceeded Overseas,
                            3rd May, 1915.


    Lieut. Colonel   W. F. A. WADHAM, V.D., Commanding.

    Majors           R. THOMPSON.
                     N. E. BARNES.

    Captains         R. P. LITTLE.
                     J. CADDY.
                     W. D. BARRATT.
                     W. G. PEARSON.
                     J. V. BARROW.
                     G. B. BALFOUR.
                     R. D. MORRELL (killed in action).
                     J. M. MAWSON.

    Lieutenants      G. H. WALKER (killed in action).
                     H. Y. HUTHWAITE.
                     A. BEARDSLEY.
                     JOHN FISHER.
                     E. H. HEWITT (killed in action).
                     R. GARDNER.
                     G. F. TAYLOR.
                     A. A. WRIGHT (killed in action).

    2nd Lieutenants  E. TILLYARD.
                     W. C. NEILL.
                     E. SPEARING (killed in action).
                     G. B. BIGLAND (killed in action).
                     H. A. BROCKLEBANK.
                     H. R. SYKES.
                     T. W. DUGDALE.
                     JAMES FISHER.

    Adjutant         V. A. JACKSON, Captain (York and Lancaster Regt.).

    Quartermaster    J. CROSSLEY, Lieutenant.

    Medical Officer  A. F. RUTHERFORD, Major, R.A.M.C. (T.F.).




                             APPENDIX “C.”


Additional Nominal Roll of Officers who served with the 1/4th Battalion
The King’s Own Royal Regt. (in order of joining):--

    Lieut. B. A. Leslie
    2nd-Lt. H. H. Hodgkinson
      „     C. G. Chapman
      „     G. J. Purnell
      „     E. D. M. Meyler
      „     H. Peak
      „     J. Finlay
      „     F. W. E. Keller
      „     J. Ward
    Lt. Col. F. M. Carleton, D.S.O.
    2nd-Lt. R. L. Purnell
    Lieut. J. A. T. Clarke
    2nd-Lt. L. Bowman
      „     P. J. Blundell
      „     D. Dugdale
      „     J. S. Corless
      „     E. Myatt
      „     J. Welch
      „     W. B. McCall
    Lieut. T. W. Dugdale
    2nd-Lt. C. Thorpe
      „     Jas. Fisher
      „     G. H. Ferns
      „     C. E. Withey
      „     J. D. Johnstone
      „     E. E. McClinton
      „     S. Steeples
      „     O. R. Lees
      „     G. R. Glenie
      „     A. M. Clarke
      „     G. Hilton
      „     S. G. Voyle
      „     S. F. Walker
      „     J. Jackson
      „     R. G. Metcalf
      „     A. J. Brockman
      „     J. M. Wilcock
      „     L. Metcalfe
      „     J. R. Lawson
    Lt. Col. J. L. Swainson D.S.O.
    2nd-Lt. H. H. Counsell
      „     J. J. Rudduck
      „     C. E. Lincey
      „     R. W. Higginson
      „     R. Bradley
      „     S. Bolton
      „     J. S. Ridsdale
      „     H. V. Johnstone
      „     E. D. Howard
      „     C. G. Lingford
      „     R. Rule
      „     H. V. R. T. Lauder
      „     C. F. R. Crawshaw
      „     J. D. Johnson
      „     R. C. Hallam
      „     T. F. Beasley
      „     A. B. Park
      „     A. P. Procter
      „     F. J. Smith
      „     A. Ellwood
      „     B. J. H. Garnett
      „     P. C. Taylor
      „     H. O. Coleman
    Capt. F. Williamson
      „   F. C. Slater
    Lieut. W. R. Pattinson
      „    G. Topham
      „    J. H. Simpson
    2nd-Lt. R. A. Mudie
      „     A. T. Sheahan
      „     R. Willett
      „     J. Pearson
      „     C. J. Alexander
      „     J. S. Paterson
      „     C. W. Ford
      „     R. Holdsworth
      „     H. A. Kershaw
      „     R. G. Hatcher
      „     J. H. Evans
      „     J. A. McGill
      „     A. E. Morton
      „     C. H. Newbold
      „     R. J. Warbrick
    Major  P. E. Robathan
    2nd-Lt. J. Thompson
      „     R. M. Senton
      „     H. G. R. Scaife
      „     C. W. Gribble
      „     D. G. Pearson
      „     G. A. Taylor
      „     A. S. Latham
      „     W. Ratock
      „     H. R. Hart
      „     J. R. Gaulter
    Lt. & Q.M. P. W. Powell
    2nd-Lt. F. C. Gilling
      „     W. E. Jones
      „     J. Way
      „     T. H. Middleton
      „     E. T. White
      „     E. S. Veevers
      „     E. Haslam
      „     N. Whittaker
      „     T. H. C. Pritchard
    Capt. T. N. Blain
    2nd-Lt. A. Binnie
      „     F. J. Shuker
      „     B. Gough
      „     L. R. Keighley
      „     N. Walkden
      „     J. R. Rundle
      „     A. J. Thorpe
      „     W. McAndrew
      „     J. McKay
      „     B. H. Pemberton
      „     N. F. Paterson
      „     G. N. Russell
      „     G. F. Raeside
      „     H. G. Rowe
      „     J. H. Sykes
      „     R. Smith
      „     W. Stewart
      „     A. J. Dartnall
      „     R. S. Dane
      „     G. Field
      „     R. W. Higginson
      „     G. W. Ferguson
      „     C. J. Holland
      „     M. Smith
      „     J. H. Collin
      „     A. Thomson
      „     L. F. Fouraker
      „     H. Hunter
      „     S. Bolton
      „     J. H. Hamer
      „     J. G. Anderson
      „     R. A. Taylor
      „     A. Fyfe
      „     T. S. Paterson
    Capt. E. A. Kendall
      „   C. L. Overton, M.C.
      „   J. I. Simpson, M.C.
    2nd-Lt. W. J. Holmes, M.C.
      „     A. W. Wyncoll
      „     H. J. Lyon
      „     E. Willis
      „     T. C. Threadgold
      „     H.W.T. Chalcraft
      „     R. Court
      „     G. A. K. Islip
      „     L. R. Andrews
      „     I. B. Rouse
      „     G. M. Gray
      „     H. Barrow
      „     D. B. Shutt
    Lieut. H. S. Brown
    2nd-Lt. G. Ribchester
      „     E. D. Osgood
      „     D. O. Maclean M.C.
      „     A. Whitmore
    Capt. W. K. Batchelor
    2nd-Lt. C. A. Russell
    Capt. B. Peers
    Lieut. R. L. Ashcroft
      „    E. H. T. Tucker
      „    A. H. Tollemache
    2nd-Lt. A. C. Notley
      „     G. H. Lowery
      „     H. E. Godfrey
      „     J. A. Vincent
    Lieut. W. L. Rudall
    2nd-Lt. N. R. Hutley
      „     L. E. Wharton
      „     T. D. R. Crilly
      „     F. C. Place, M.M.
      „     F. C. Waywell
      „     H. Richardson, D.C.M.
      „     R. H. Robinson
      „     G. W. E. Sanderson
    2nd-Lt. W. Shaw
      „     J. A. Thomas
      „     E. Williams
      „     J. Grindal
      „     W. Y. Gleave
      „     J. J. R. Larkin
      „     J. G. Anderson
      „     E. Lockey
      „     A. W. Rigg
      „     D. Burr
      „     H. S. Scott
      „     J. W. Lugard
      „     S. Smith
    Lieut. A. Fraser
    Capt. R. T. Bethune
    2nd-Lt. J. B. Lindsay
      „     C. Elliott


                    DEPARTMENTAL OFFICERS ATTACHED.

    Capt. J. S. Titmas, R.A.M.C.
    Lieut. J. H. C. Gatchell, R.A.M.C.
    Capt. J. S. G. Wilson, R.A.M.C.
    Rev. R. H. Hingley, C.F.
    Rev. R. Gillenders, C.F.
    Rev. T. L. B. Westerdale, C.F.




                             APPENDIX “D.”

                         OFFICERS’ CASUALTIES.

                           KILLED IN ACTION.

    2nd-Lt. G. B. Bigland
    Lieut. S. Bolton
    2nd-Lt. L. Bowman, R.A.F.
      „     R. Bradley
      „     A. J. Brockman
    Lieut. A. M. Clark
    2nd-Lt. J. H. Collin
      „     R. Court
      „     A. J. Dartnall
      „     T. W. Dugdale
    Capt. A. Ellwood
    2nd-Lt. C. W. Ford
      „     G. R. Glenie
      „     B. H. Gough
    Lieut. E. H. Hewitt
    2nd-Lt. G. Hilton
      „     H.H. Hodgkinson
      „     C. J. Holland
      „     E. D. Howard
      „     H. Hunter
      „     J. D. Johnstone
      „     P. Jolly
      „     J. P. Lawson
      „     W. R. Leah
      „     C. E. Lincey
      „     L. Metcalf
    Capt. R. D. A. Morrell
    2nd-Lt. A. C. Notley
      „     F. C. Place
      „     G. F. Raeside
      „     B. H. Robinson
      „     J. R. Rundle
    Lieut. E. Scott-Miller
      „    E. Spearing
    2nd-Lt. A. Thomson
      „     E. S. Veevers
    Lieut. G. H. Walker
    2nd-Lt. E. T. White
    Capt. C. E. Withey
      „   A. A. Wright


                            DIED OF WOUNDS.

    2nd-Lt. R. G. Hatcher
      „     L. R. Keighley
    Lieut. J. J. Rudduck
    Lt. Col. J. L. Swainson, D.S.O.
    2nd-Lt. A. Wheatley
    2nd-Lt. J. Ward (accidentally)


                          WOUNDED IN ACTION.

    2nd-Lt. J. C. Alexander
      „     J. G. Anderson
      „     J. W. H. Axtell
      „     F. F. Beazley
    Capt. T. R. Blain
      „   H. A. Brocklebank
    2nd-Lt. L. Bowman
      „     A. M. Clarke
    Capt. J. A. T. Clarke
    2nd-Lt. H. H. Counsell
      „     G. F. H. Crawshaw
      „     W. Eatock
      „     G. W. Ferguson
      „     G. H. Ferns
      „     G. Field
    Lieut. R. Gardner (accidentally)
    2nd-Lt. J. R. Gaulter
      „     F. C. Gilling
      „     J. Grindal
      „     R. C. Hallam
      „     H. R. Hart
      „     E. Haslam
      „     J. D. Johnstone
    Capt. F. Jones
    2nd-Lt. W. E. Jones
      „     L. R. Keighley
      „     J. J. R. Larkin
      „     C. G. Lingford
      „     J. Mackay
      „     J. A. McGill
      „     R. G. Metcalfe
      „     T. H. Middleton
    Capt. W. C. Neill
    2nd-Lt. C. H. Newbold
    Capt. W. R. Pattinson
    2nd-Lt. B. H. Pemberton
      „     R. L. Purnell
      „     A. W. Rigg
      „     I. B. Rouse
      „     J. J. Rudduck
      „     G. W. E. Sanderson
      „     H. G. Scaife
      „     R. M. Senton
      „     W. Shaw
      „     F. J. Smith
      „     N. Smith
      „     R. Smith
    Lieut. E. Spearing
    2nd-Lt. S. Steeple
      „     W. McK. Stewart
      „     H. R. Sykes
      „     J. H. Sykes
      „     G. A. Taylor
      „     P. C. Taylor
      „     J. Thompson
    Lt. Col. R. Thompson
    2nd-Lt. A. J. Thorpe
      „     A. Turner
      „     S. G. Voyle (accidentally)
      „     N. Walkden
      „     S. F. Walker
      „     H. J. Warbrick
      „     F. C. Waywell
      „     H. Welsh
      „     L. E. Wharton
      „     A. Whitmore
      „     N. Whittaker
      „     J. M. Wilcock
    Capt. F. H. Williamson
    2nd-Lt. C. E. Withey


                               MISSING.

    2nd-Lt. W. Holmes (and wounded)
    Lieut. A. S. Latham
    2nd-Lt. W. McAndrews
      „     E. D. Osgood
      „     R. Smith
      „     R. A. Taylor
      „     T. C. Threadgold


                           PRISONERS OF WAR.

    2nd-Lt. G. Field
    Capt.   W. G. Pearson (and wounded)


                                AWARDS.


                            VICTORIA CROSS.

                 2nd Lieut. J. H. Collin (Posthumous)


                DISTINGUISHED SERVICE ORDER (and Bar).

                        Lt. Col. G. B. Balfour


                            MILITARY CROSS.

    2nd-Lt. J. C. Alexander
      „     L. R. Andrews
      „     T. S. Bateson
    Capt. T. R. Blain
    2nd-Lt. R. S. Dane
    Capt. A. Ellwood
      „   J. H. Evans
      „   R. Gardner
    2nd-Lt. J. R. Gaulter
    Capt. H. Y. Huthwaite
      „   E. A. Kendall
    2nd-Lt. A. S. Latham
    Capt. A. E. Morton
    2nd-Lt. B. H. Pemberton
      „     F. C. Place, M.M.
    Lieut. P. W. Powell
    2nd-Lt. T. H. Pritchard
    Capt. A. P. Procter
    2nd-Lt. G. F. Raeside
      „     H. Richardson
      „     I. B. Rouse
      „     G. A. Taylor
    Capt. A. A. Wright


                        FRENCH CROIX-DE-GUERRE.

    Capt. J. A. T. Clarke
    2nd-Lt. R. C. Hallam


                       MENTIONED IN DESPATCHES.

    Lt. Col. G. B. Balfour (three times)
    2nd-Lt. H. R. Hart
    Lieut. G. F. Taylor
      „    E. H. Hewitt
      „    E. Myatt


                BROUGHT TO THE NOTICE OF THE SECRETARY
              OF STATE “FOR VALUABLE SERVICES RENDERED IN
                       CONNECTION WITH THE WAR.”

                    Lt. Col. W. F. A. Wadham, V.D.




                             APPENDIX “E.”

                            RANK AND FILE.


                           KILLED IN ACTION.

    Pte. T. H. Agar
      „  T. Airey
    L/Cpl. T. Akister
    Pte. R. Allen
      „  T. Angrove
      „  G. Ashcroft
      „  G. Ashworth
      „  A. Askew
      „  H. R. Atkinson
      „  J. Atkinson
      „  T. Bagot
      „  H. Bailey
    Cpl. T. Balderston
    Pte. J. J. Barrow
      „  E. Baxendale
      „  T. Baxter
      „  W. Beckitt
      „  W. Bell
      „  F. Bellamy
    L/Cpl. J. Bennett
    Pte. J. Bennett
      „  H. Bland
      „  T. Bowron
      „  J. Brack
    L/Cpl. R. W. Bransden
    Pte. V. Brazil
    L/Cpl. W. T. Brew
    L/Sgt. J. Brocklebank
    Pte. J. J. Brocklebank
      „  P. Brogan
    L/Cpl. J. A. Brookes
      „  J. Brown
    Pte. L. E. Burley
    Sgt. F. J. Burn
    Pte. M. Burton
    L/Sgt. M. Caddy
    Pte. F. Carson
      „  R. Carter
      „  S. Carter
      „  J. Cartwright
      „  E. Catterall
      „  A. Chadwick
    Sgt. J. Charnock
    Pte. H. Churm
      „  J. Cloudsdale
      „  E. Coles
      „  J. Collier
      „  T. E. Collinge
    L/Cpl. J. Collinson
    Pte. J. Cooley
      „  S. Corbett
      „  W. Cottam
      „  A. Coulter
      „  B. Crispe
      „  W. Croasdale
    Sgt. J. M. Cross
    Pte. T. Crossman
      „  H. Currie
      „  E. Curwen
      „  C. Davies
      „  W. Dean
    L/Cpl. A. Diggle
    Pte. R. Dixon
      „  H. Dobson
      „  J. Dodd
      „  R. Donovan
      „  A. Downham
      „  W. A. Downham
      „  J. Duckworth
      „  P. Duerden
    Sgt. S. Eagers
    Pte. T. Eccles
    L/Cpl. T. Else
    Pte. F. Elston
      „  H. Evans
      „  E. Fairhurst
      „  W. T. A. Fell
      „  E. Fisher
      „  J. Fitzwilliam
    Sgt. G. Fletcher
    Pte. F. J. Fletcher
      „  T. Ford
      „  J. H. Frawley
      „  H. Fryer
      „  C. Gawne
      „  W. Gentles
      „  J. E. Gill
      „  W. Glover
      „  J. Green
      „  J. Greenhalgh
      „  E. Grey
      „  J. Griffiths
      „  E. Hadwin
      „  E. Hall
      „  G. Hardcastle
      „  J. Hargreaves
    L/Cpl. J. E. Haslam
    Pte. W. Haythorn
      „  E. Haythornwaite
      „  H. Hayward
      „  J. Hems
      „  T. Hesketh
      „  L. Higgs
      „  J. Hilton
      „  T. Hodgson
      „  W. C. Hogg
      „  J. Hoggarth
      „  H. Hoole
      „  R. Houghton
      „  P. Howcroft
      „  R. Hughes
    L/Sgt. W. S. Inman
    Cpl. T. Jackson
    Pte. T. James
      „  W. Jameson
    L/Cpl. N. Jamieson
      „  J. Jarvis
    Pte. J. Johnson
      „  J. Johnson
      „  P. Johnson
      „  W. E. Johnson
      „  R. L. Jones
      „  J. T. Kay
      „  A. Kelly
      „  W. Knipe
      „  R. Knowles
      „  A. Lancaster
      „  D. Leach
      „  E. Lenanghan
    Cpl. N. Lewis
    Pte. W. Liptrot
      „  J. W. Lister
      „  J. E. Lock
    L/Cpl. J. Lockhead
    Pte. T. Lofthouse
    Cpl. T. Long
    Pte. W. Long
      „  L. Longworth
      „  R. Lovell
    L/Cpl. T. A. Lowe
    Pte. D. Maler
      „  H. Mason
      „  W. Mason
    Cpl. W. Masters
    Pte. J. Mather
    L/Sgt. J. H. Mellon
    Pte. G. Mercer
    Sgt. J. Miles
    Pte. J. Miles
      „  J. Millington
    Cpl. W. H. Milton
    Pte. J. Mitchell
      „  E. V. Monks
      „  W. Moran
      „  G. Moses
      „  S. Myerscough
      „  J. McAlarney
      „  A. McDowell
      „  J. H. McGill
      „  J. H. McGowan
      „  W. J. McKay
      „  J. McQuade
      „  B. McVittie
      „  R. H. Nelson
      „  J. E. S. Newby
      „  E. Nicholson
    L/Cpl. J. J. Nicholson
    Pte. J. Nightingale
      „  R. Noble
      „  A. Nuttall
      „  J. Nutter
      „  S. Oliver
    L/Cpl. W. O’Neill
      „  R. Oversby
    C.Q.M.S. Page
    Pte. H. Parker
      „  J. J. Parsons
      „  R. Penaluna
      „  J. H. Perry
    Cpl. J. W. Pettitt
    Pte. C. S. Petty
    L/Sgt. H. H. Pill
    Pte. W. R. Pimm
      „  C. Pittaway
    Cpl. J. Postlethwaite
    Pte. R. F. Postlethwaite
      „  W. Postlethwaite
      „  J. Powell
      „  H. Pownall
    Cpl. R. Proudfoot
    Pte. J. Ratcliffe
    Sgt. T. S. Rathbone
    Pte. T. Raven
      „  W. Rawsthorne
    Sgt. J. Reid
    Pte. H. Ribiero
    Cpl. S. Richardson
    Pte. F. P. Rigg
    Sgt. G. Robinson
      „  R. Robinson
    L/Cpl. S. Robinson
    Pte. W. Robinson
    Cpl. D. G. Rowlandson
    Pte. J. Royle
    L/Cpl. F. Ryder
    Pte. E. Salthouse
    L/Cpl. J. Sandilands
    Pte. J. E. Scargill
      „  E. Sellars
      „  C. Settle
      „  A. Sharp
      „  T. Sharp
    L/Sgt. C. Shaw
    Pte. R. Shaw
    L/Cpl. F. Shepherd
    Pte. R. Shone
      „  A. Sidebottom
      „  G. Simpson
      „  G. Simpson
    Cpl. A. Singleton
    Pte. J. A. Singleton
      „  H. E. Slaymaker
      „  F. Smith
    L/Cpl. P. Smith
    Pte. P. Stanworth
    Sgt. R. L. Steel
    Pte. A. F. Stevens
    Cpl. W. Stewart
    Pte. J. Strickland
      „  F. Swainson
      „  C. Swift
      „  J. Swindlehurst
      „  W. Sykes
      „  J. W. Taylor
      „  H. Thompson
    Sgt. R. Thompson
    Pte. W. Thompson
      „  G. Titterington
    Sgt. R. E. Titterington
    Pte. L. Truran
      „  F. Twynham
      „  G. F. Tyer
      „  L. Tyson
      „  R. Tyson
      „  W. Unsworth
    Sgt. R. Usher
    L/Cpl. D. Vickers
    Pte. J. Vincent
      „  H. D. Vity
      „  L. Wade
      „  J. Walker
      „  J. Walmsley
      „  R. M. Walters
    Sgt. G. H. Watson
    Pte. J. T. Watts
      „  F. Webster
      „  J. Whiteway
      „  T. Whittle
      „  J. Wild
    Sgt. J. Williams
    Pte. W. Williams
    L/Cpl. J. Wilson
    Pte. J. Winder
    L/Cpl. R. Woodward
    Pte. J. Young


                            DIED OF WOUNDS.

    Pte. R. Abbott
    L/Sergt. C. E. Ansell
    Pte. T. Ashton
      „  J. Atherton
      „  A. Baker
      „  H. E. Barker
      „  S. Barnett
      „  W. H. Barrow
    L/Cpl. J. Barry
    Cpl. F. Baxter
    Pte. J. Benson
      „  W. Bevins
      „  J. Bowfield
      „  E. M. Burne
    Sgt. F. Cannon
    Pte. W. Carradus
      „  E. J. Carton
      „  J. B. Clayton
      „  J. Coombe
      „  J. Cooper
      „  R. Corlett
      „  C. Cragg
      „  W. Crossland
      „  J. Dyson
      „  C. R. Eastham
      „  T. Eccles
      „  A. Evans
      „  R. E. Fenton
    Cpl. W. M. Fletcher
    Pte. J. Fortune
      „  T. Fox
      „  A. H. Garnett
      „  S. Geldart
    C.S.M. H. P. Gendle
    Pte. C. Gregory
      „  F. Griffies
      „  H. Hadfield
      „  W. Harrison
      „  P. Higson
    L/Sgt. H. Hinchcliffe
    Pte. W. R. Holmes
      „  J. Hoole
      „  W. Hutton
      „  J. Kelly
      „  J.T. King
      „  W. Lawson
      „  W. Mathews
      „  G. A. Merritt
      „  R. H. A. Moreton
    L/Sgt. C. Morris
    Pte. D. Muncaster
    L/Cpl. N. McKenzie
    Pte. J. McMahon
    Cpl. H. Neal
    Pte. M. Newby
      „  W. Nicholson
      „  T. E. Noble
    L/Cpl. J. Oxley
    Pte. G. E. Park
      „  W. Penny
      „  W. Phillips
    L/Cpl. R. Porter
    Pte. G. Poskitt
      „  T. Preston
    Sgt. J. H. Quayle
      „  A. Redman
    L/Col. J. Riley
    Pte. G. W. Robinson
      „  B. Rogerson
      „  F. Rothersay
      „  W. Rowlands
      „  W. R. Rowlands
      „  H. W. Rudge
      „  G. W. Rylands
      „  H. Simmons
      „  W. Smedley
      „  H. Smith
      „  A. Solari
      „  J. Sprout
      „  H. Stott
      „  H. Symons
      „  F. Talbot
    Sgt. L. C. Taylor
    Pte. J. Topping
    L/Cpl. H. Q. Towers
    Pte. W. G. Trewern
      „  T. C. Vargoe
      „  R. Wallace
      „  E. Watson
      „  J. Whalley
      „  T. Wharton
      „  T. Whiteside
      „  T. Whiting
      „  J. Whittam
      „  J. Whittam
      „  J. Wilding
      „  H. Wilson
      „  W. Wooff
      „  F. H. Worth




                             APPENDIX “F.”

                            RANK AND FILE.


                          WOUNDED IN ACTION.


    Pte. W. Abernethy
      „  J. Abram
      „  A. Akred
      „  W. Allen
      „  R. Anderton
      „  T. Angrove
    L/Cpl. L. Andrewartha
    Pte. R. J. Armstrong
      „  A. Arnold
      „  W. G. Arnott
      „  R. Ashburner
      „  T. Ashburner
      „  G. Ashcroft
      „  H. T. Ashnore
      „  J. Ashnore
      „  T. Ashton
    L/Cpl. J. Ashworth
    Pte. Aspinall
      „  J. Astley
      „  J. Atherton
      „  J. Atkinson
      „  J. Atkinson
      „  J. J. Atkinson
    L/Sgt. Atkinson
    Pte. T. Atkinson
      „  H. Backhouse
      „  J. Backhouse
      „  T. Baker
      „  A. Bagshaw
      „  J. Bailey
      „  P. Bailey
      „  R. Balderson
    Cpl. J. Balderston
    Pte. A. Baldwin
      „  T. Balm
    L/Cpl. H. Bamber
    Pte. J. Bamber
      „  J. R. Bamber
      „  H. E. Barker
      „  W. Barker
      „  G. Barnes
      „  S. Barnett
    Cpl. E. W. Barrow
    Pte. F. Barrow
      „  W. Barrow
      „  P. Barton
    L/Sgt. C. Bates
    Pte. H. Bebbington
      „  H. Back
      „  R. Bee
    Cpl. R. Bell
    C.S.M. W. Bell
    Cpl. E. Bennett
    Pte. N. Bennett
      „  R. J. Bennett
      „  S. Bennett
      „  T. Benson
      „  D. Berwick
      „  T. Beswick
      „  E. Bevins
      „  T. E. Bewsher
      „  T. H. Bewsher
      „  H. Bidwell
      „  A. V. Billington
      „  T. Binns
      „  C. E. Birch
      „  R. Birkett
      „  E. Birmingham
      „  D. Black
    L/Cpl. J. Blake
      „  W. Blackburn
    Pte. W. Blakeborough
      „  E. Blamire
      „  S. Bloomfield
      „  G. Bool
      „  W. Boom
      „  T. Bowers
      „  J. Bowling
      „  G. Bowman
      „  J. Boylan
    L/Cpl. H. Bradley
    Pte. A. Brady
      „  J. Braithwaite
    C.S.M. T. Braithwaite
    Pte. W. Braithwaite
      „  R. Brannon
    L/Sgt. R. Bray
      „  W. Bray
    Pte. H. Brewer
    Sgt. J. Brewer
    Pte. H. Bridge
      „  C. Brocklebank
      „  J. T. Brocklebank
      „  W. Brocklebank
      „  G. Broderick
      „  R. Brookes
    Sgt. C. Brown
    Pte. R. Brown
      „  G. W. Brunskill
    L/Cpl. D. Bryan
    Pte. J. Bulderson
      „  N. Bullivant
      „  J. T. Bullock
      „  J. Bumford (accidentally)
      „  T. Bunford
      „  E. Burley
      „  H. Burley
    Sgt. J. F. Burns
    Cpl. H. Burns
    Pte. E. N. Burns
      „  F. Burns
      „  J. J. Burns
      „  J. W. Burns
      „  J. Burrows
    Sgt. A. Burton
    C.S.M. R. Butcher
    L/Cpl. H. Butler
    Pte. G. W. Caine
      „  V. Cairns
      „  R. Campbell
      „  W. Canning
      „  J. Cannon
      „  J. Capstick
      „  J. Cardwell
      „  J. Carrick
    Sgt. J. Carrick
    Pte. R. Carter
      „  T. Carter
      „  E. J. Cartwright
    Cpl. J. H. Casper
    Pte. F. Casson
    Sgt. T. J. Chapple
    Pte. H. Chadderton
      „  I. Chadwick
      „  T. Chadwick
    Sgt. W. Chadwick
    Pte. W. J. Chapman
    Sgt. J. Charnock
    Pte. J. T. Charters
    Sgt. T. W. Cheeseman
    Pte. L. Chorlton
      „  W. P. Christian
      „  S. Christie
    Sgt. F. Clampitt
    Pte. J. Clare
      „ W. Clare
    L/Cpl. A. Clark
    Cpl. G. Clarke
    Pte. J. H. Clarke
      „  J. Clarke
      „  R. Clarke
      „  S. Clarke
      „  W. Clarke
      „  E. Clarkson
      „  J. B. Clayton
      „  R. Clegg
      „  A. Clemunson
      „  W. Cooke
      „  T. Connor
      „  W. Conroy
      „  T. Cooper
    L/Cpl. C. Cooper
    Pte. C. D. Corless
    L/Cpl. E. Corbthwaite
    Pte. J. Cottam
    L/Cpl. J. Coultsman
    Pte. S. Coupe
      „  J. Coupland
    L/Cpl. J. Coupland
    Pte. H. G. Courtnell
    Sgt. J. Coward
    Pte. L. Coward
      „  T. Coward
      „  E. Cowell
    Cpl. G. W. Cox
    Pte. D. G. Craig
      „  S. Crane
      „  T. Cross
      „  C. W. Crowther
      „  J. E. Cuddy
      „  M. Cunningham
      „  H. Cunningham
      „  R. Cunningham
      „  J. Curran
      „  W. G. Dacre
      „  W. W. Dalton
      „  H. Daly
      „  W. Danson
      „  S. Darby
      „  F. Davies
      „  H. Davies
      „  J. Davies
      „  G. Dawson
      „  R. Dawson
    L/Cpl. R. Dawson
    Pte. M. Dembovski
      „  E. M. Denny
      „  W. H. Dent
      „  H. Derbyshire
      „  S. Derdle
      „  J. E. Dewhurst
      „  S. Dickinson
      „  J. Dickson
      „  A. Dixon
      „  R. Dixon
      „  S. Dixon
      „  W. Dixon
      „  J. Dobson
    Sgt. G. Dockeray
    Pte. G. H. Dowker
      „  A. Downing
      „  T. E. Drew
    L/Cpl. M. Drinkall
    Cpl. T. Dumphey
      „  C. Durkin
    Pte. J. Dyson
      „  G. Eagers. (accidentally)
      „  J. Eagle
      „  J. W. Earnshaw
    L/Sgt. H. Eastwood
    Pte. E. Eaton
    L/Cpl. G. Eddleston
    Pte. A. Edge
      „  F. Edmondson
    L/Cpl. T. Edmondson
    Pte. J. H. Edwards
      „  E. Egan
      „  J. Elcocks
      „  T. Ellam
    Cpl. T. Entwistle
    L/Sgt. J. Erhart
    Pte. W. Escolme
      „  A. Evans
      „  J. H. Evans
    Sgt. W. H. Farish
    Pte. R. Farnen
      „  W. Farnworth
      „  J. Farrell
      „  R. Farrer
      „  P. Fawcett
    Cpl. T. Fawcett
    Sgt. H. Fearnley
    Pte. J. Fell (accidentally)
      „  N. Fell
      „  F. Fenwick
      „  W. Fisher
      „  H. Fitters
      „  T. Fitzsimmons
    L/Cpl. W. Fitzsimmons
    Pte. J. Fletcher
      „  J. W. Flitcroft
      „  S. Foster
      „  P. Fox
      „  W. France
    L/Cpl. S. Friend
    Pte. F. Froggart
      „  A. Fryer
      „  A. Fullard
      „  H. Fullard
      „  J. Fulwood
      „  J. Fury
      „  R. Gallagher
      „  J. R. Gardner
      „  J. Garner
      „  A. H. Garnett
      „  H. Garstang
      „  W. Garvey
      „  J. Gaskarth
    C.S.M. H. P. Gendle
    Pte. T. Gendle
      „  H. Gent (accidentally)
      „  W. Gilbert
      „  G. Gill
      „  A. Gillbanks
    L/Cpl. H. Gildea
    Pte. T. E. Gibbons
    L/Cpl. H. Glaister
    Pte. J. Glover
      „  W. Goldstan
      „  H. Gomersall
      „  J. Gooden
      „  H. Goodwin
      „  J. Goodwin
    Sgt. F. L. Gott
    Pte. S. J. Gowling
      „  F. Graham
      „  J. Greaves
      „  L. Gredy
      „  W. J. Green
      „  J. Greenhill
      „  A. Greenhow
      „  E. Greenhow
      „  H. Greenhow
      „  J. Greenhow
      „  J. Gregg
    L/Sgt. J. Gregson
    Pte. J. Grimshaw
      „  C. Grindrod
      „  H. Grisegale
      „  R. Grisedale
      „  G. Grosvenor
      „  A. Gunning
      „  H. R. Hackney
      „  W. Hague
      „  S. A. Haines
      „  E. Hall
      „  J. Halsall
      „  J. W. Hamer
      „  F. Hampson
      „  W. Hampson
      „  F. Hanley
      „  T. Hargreaves
      „  J. Harris
      „  T. Harris
      „  H. Harrison
      „  J. Harrison
      „  J. R. Harrison
    L/Cpl. R. Hartley
    Pte. T. Haskett
      „  A Hawarden
      „  E. Hatchman
      „  W. J. Hawkins
      „  H. Haworth
      „  L. Healey
      „  H. Heaton
      „  G. Helme
      „  W. G. Helmsley
      „  R. Henderson
      „  T. Henderson
      „  R. Hesketh
      „  A. Hibbert
      „  C. Higginson
      „  T. H. High
      „  E. Hillen
    Cpl. W. Hird
    Pte. W. Hitchen
      „  R. Hodgson
    L/Cpl. A. E. Hodgson
    Pte. T. Hodgson
      „  W. Hodgson
    L/Cpl. E. Hodgson
    Pte. J. E. Hodgkinson
      „  J. Hogan
      „  J. Hoggarth (accidentally)
      „  J. Holgate
      „  J. Hollingworth
      „  A. Holman
    L/Cpl. F. Holmes
      „  G. Holmes
    Pte. W. M. Holmes
      „  W. L. Holroyd
    C.S.M. R. H. Horne
    Pte. H. Horrabin
      „  E. Hoskin (accidentally)
      „  J. Hoskin
    Cpl. G. Hosking
    Pte. E. J. Hoskins
      „  J. P. Hough
      „  T. Hovington
      „  F. Howarth
      „  G. Howarth (accidentally)
    L/Cpl. T. Howarth
    Pte. W. Howarth
    L/Sgt. G. Huddleston
    Pte. Huddleston
      „  J. R. Hughes
      „  R. A. Hughes
    L/Cpl. S. Hughes
    Pte. J. E. Hunt
      „  W. Hunter
      „  J. M. Hurst
      „  A. Hutchinson
    L/Cpl. T. Hutchinson
    Pte. S. Ibbotson
      „  C. Ingram
      „  R. W. Irving
      „  J. Irwin
      „  F. Isaacs
      „  A. Isherwood
    L/Cpl. A. Jackson
    Cpl. A. Jackson
    L/Sgt. F. Jackson
    Pte. H. Jackson
      „  S. Jackson
      „  W. Jackson
    L/Cpl. W. H. Jackson
      „  W. W. Jackson
    Sgt. W. W. Jackson
    Pte. J. James
      „  T. James
    L/Cpl. F. Jeffrey
    Pte. W. J. Jeffrey
      „  W. Jenkinson
      „  J. H. Jervis
      „  J. Jines
      „  A. Johns
      „  A. Johnson
      „  A. P. Johnson
      „  G. A. Johnson
    Cpl. W. Johnston
    Pte. C. Jones
      „  E. V. Jones
      „  F. Jones
      „  F. Kay
      „  A. Kay
      „  E. Keeton
    Cpl. M. Keelan
    L/Cpl. A. Kelly
    Pte. E. Kelly
      „  J. Kelly
      „  P. R. Kemp
      „  J. Kempson
      „  J. Kendall
      „  W. Kewley
    Sgt. W. Kirby
    Pte. C. F. Kirkham
      „  H. Kinder
    Cpl. H. H. Kitchen
    Pte. J. Kitchen
    Cpl. E. Kneebone
    Pte. R. Knight
      „  R. Lamb
    L/Cpl. W. Lamb
    Pte. F. Lanning
      „  A. Lawrence
      „  H. Lawrence
      „  J. Lay
      „  S. Leach
      „  H. Leake
      „  W. Leather
      „  H. Lee
      „  F. Lees
      „  E. Lenenghan
      „  W. Lever
      „  A. Leviston
      „  A. Lewis
      „  R. Lewis
      „  V. L. Lills
    L/Cpl. J. Lingard
    Pte. R. Littler
    Cpl. W. Livesey
      „  T. E. Lloyd
      „  J. T. Loftus
    Pte. J. Lomax
      „  G. Long
    Cpl. T. Long
    Pte. W. E. Longcroft
      „  C. Longworth (accidentally)
    Cpl. O. Longworth
    Pte. R. Lonsdale
      „  J. Looms
      „  J. E. Lowden
      „  H. Lowe
      „  J. Lowery
      „  A. Lowther
      „  W. Lucas
      „  W. J. Lunt
      „  F. Mackintosh
    Sgt. W. Maden
    Pte. E. W. Magor
      „  T. Makinson
      „  M. Mannion
      „  W. Marland
      „  C. Marr
      „  S. Marr
      „  J. W. Marshall
      „  H. Marshall
      „  W. Marshall
    Cpl. H. Martin
    Pte. T. H. Martin
      „  J. Martindale
      „  T. Martindale
      „  F. Mason
      „  W. Mason
      „  A. Mawson
    Cpl. T. Mayson
    Pte. J. Meikleham
      „  J. Melia
      „  G. Melling
    L/Cpl. J. Mellor
    Pte. J. I. Menzies
      „  R. Mercer
      „  R. Merrett
    Sgt. T. H. Middleton
    Pte. D. Miller
      „  F. H. Miller
    L/Cpl. W. Miller
    Pte. G. Millett
      „  A. S. Milligan
      „  G. Milligan
      „  J. Millington
      „  A. Mills
      „  J. B. Mitchell
    L/Sgt. R. Mollard
    Pte. R. Monks
      „  W. Monks
      „  B. Moore
      „  R. Moorhouse
      „  J. Moreland
      „  J. Morgan
      „  S. Morgan
    Sgt. J. P. Morgan
    L/Cpl. A. S. Morris
    Pte. A. Morrow
      „  R. Morton
      „  L. Mountcastle
      „  J. Murphy
      „  P. J. Murphy
      „  J. P. Murphy
      „  J. Murray
      „  W. Mylchreest
      „  A. McBride (accidentally)
      „  A. McVaig
      „  R. McDonald
      „  B. McGuinness
      „  A. McKenzie
      „  F. McKeown
      „  R. McKeron
      „  A. McLaughlin
      „  D. McLaughlin
      „  J. McMahon
      „  J. McMasters
      „  S. McNa
      „  P. McPoland
    L/Cpl. A. McWilliams
    Pte. L. Nazelcop
      „  J. Neild
      „  S. Nelson
      „  R. E. Newby
      „  T. H. Newby
    Sgt. E. L. Newham
    Pte. F. J. Newling
    Sgt. E. Newton
    Pte. J. Newton
      „  F. R. Nicholas
      „  J. Nicholls
      „  C. Nickolas
      „  W. Nickolas
    L/Cpl. H. Nightingale
    Pte. D. F. Noake
      „  T. E. Noble
      „  H. Nock
      „  F. H. Nolan
      „  J. Notman
      „  J. Nottle
      „  J. H. Nunn
      „  S. Nuttall
      „  T. O’Brien
      „  G. D. Ogden
      „  G. R. Outham
      „  W. J. Orton
      „  E. Osborne
      „  W. H. Paine
      „  H. A. Palethorpe
      „  J. T. Palmer
      „  N. Palmer
      „  F. Parker
      „  G. H. Parker
      „  J. E. Parker
      „  W. Parker
      „  W. H. Parker
      „  A. W. Parkinson
      „  T. Parkinson
      „  W. Parkinson
      „  W. T. Parkinson
    Sgt. H. Parnell
    L/Cpl. J. S. Parry
    Pte. T. A. Parsons
      „  M. H. Patterson
      „  J. Pattinson
      „  J. C. Peake
      „  E. Pearson
    L/Sgt. F. Pearson
    Sgt. J. R. Pearson
    Pte. H. Perceval
    L/Cpl. H. Phillips
    Pte. J. Phillips
      „  A. Phizacklea
      „  E. Phizacklea
    Sgt. R. W. Pickin
    Pte. W. Pickles
      „  F. Pickthall(accidentally)
      „  J. Pierson
      „  A. Pilkington
      „  J. Pilkington
      „  A. Pill
      „  R. Pipe
      „  W. Pinch
      „  J. H. Platt
      „  J. Pollitt
      „  J. Porter
      „  J. W. Porter
    Cpl. M. J. Porter
    Pte. J. Postlethwaite
      „  J. Preston
      „  T. Preston
      „  D. Preston
      „  C. J. Price
      „  H. Price
      „  A. Priestley
      „  J. Pritchard
      „  R. Proctor
      „  H. Proudfoot
      „  T. Purcell
    L/Cpl. J. Purviss
    Pte. A. B. Pyle
    Dr. G. Quigley
    Pte. P. Quinn
      „  G. Radford
      „  J. Rafferty
      „  H. Railton
      „  J. Ralph
      „  J. Ramsbottom
      „  W. Ranger
      „  H. Ratcliffe
      „  G. J. Rawlinson
      „  G. Read
      „  W. Reddicliffe
    Sgt. A. Redman
    Cpl. S. W. Redman
    Pte. J. Reeve
      „  T. Rennison
      „  E. Retallick
      „  A. Rhodes
    Sgt. F. Richardson
    Pte. S. Richardson
      „  C. Riddle
      „  H. Riding
      „  W. Ridings
      „  T. E. Ridley
      „  H. Rigg (accidentally)
      „  H. Rimmer
      „  J. Roberts
      „  W. J. Roberts
    Sgt. F. Robertson
    Pte. E. Robinson
      „  E. G. Robinson
      „  W. Robinson
      „  F. Robson
      „  W. Rockcliffe
      „  J. Rogerson
      „  W. Roebuck
      „  A. Rollinson
    L/Cpl. G. Rorison
    Pte. R. Rorison
      „  F. Rose
      „  S. V. Rose
    Cpl. T. Rose
    Pte. J. Round
      „  A. Rowe
      „  S. Rowe
      „  S. J. Rowe
      „  A. Rusconi
      „  F. Rush
      „  W. Rushton
      „  G. W. Rylands
      „  H. Sadler
      „  J. Sanderson
      „  J. Sandilands
      „  F. W. Sarrett
      „  A. Saunders
      „  F. W. Saunders
    Cpl. E. Savage
    Pte. J. Savage
      „  E. Scall
      „  W. Schofield
      „  J. Scholes
      „  W. Scott
      „  T. Scrogham
      „  W. Scrogham
      „  J. Sharples
    L/Cpl. H. Shaw
    Pte. H. Shaw
      „  L. Shaw
    L/Sgt. H. Shelley
    Pte. B. Shepherd
    L/Cpl. J. T. Shepherd
    Pte. T. Shepherd
      „  R. Simm
    L/Cpl. G. Simpson
    Pte. R. Simpson
      „  S. Simpson
      „  P. Singleton
      „  E. Slater
    Cpl. R. Slater
    Pte. W. Slater
      „  J. E. Slinger
      „  T. Small
      „  B. Smith
      „  G. Smith
      „  Jas. Smith (accidentally)
      „  J. Smith
      „  J. Smith
    L/Sgt. J. Smith
    Cpl. J. D. Smith
    Pte. H. Smith
      „  N. Smith
      „  T. Smith
      „  W. Smith
    L/Cpl. W. H. Smith
    Pte. J. D. Speakman
      „  S. Spencer
      „  L. Springthorpe
      „  G. Sprout
      „  H. Sprout
      „  J. Sprout
      „  T. Stables
      „  J. Steel
    L/Cpl. W. Steel
    Pte. F. Steele
      „  W. Steele
      „  J. Stenchion
      „  L. G. Stephens
    L/Cpl. E. Stephenson
    Pte. J. Stephenson
      „  W. Stevens
      „  C. Stewart
      „  R. Stirrup
      „  W. Stone
    Cpl. C. D. Stops
    Pte. F. Storey
      „  H. Stott
      „  B. Stowe
      „  G. Strickland
      „  W. Summerson
      „  L. Swainson
    C.S.M. A. Sweeney
    Pte. D. Talbot
    L/Cpl. A. V. Taylor
      „  J. Taylor
    Sgt. L. C. Taylor
    Pte. M. Taylor
      „  T. Taylor
      „  W. W. Taylor
      „  A. Tennant
      „  R. Terry
      „  G. F. Tevevdale
      „  E. E. Thomas
      „  A. Thompson
      „  F. Thompson
      „  G. T. Thompson
      „  J. G. Thompson
    L/Cpl. J. H. Thompson
    Pte. R. Thompson
      „  R. S. Thompson
      „  W. W. Thompson
    Cpl. W. Thompson
    Pte. W. Thompson
      „  F. T. Thorley
      „  J. M. Thornley
      „  W. Thornborough
    Sgt. F. J. Threblecock
    Pte. W. Threlfall
      „  J. H. Tildesley
      „  W. Tindall
      „  J. Tinsley
      „  W. Tinsley
    L/Cpl. J. W. Tomlinson
    Pte. J. W. Tomlinson
      „  R. Tomlinson
      „  W. Tomlinson
      „  J. Tooney
      „  A. Topley
      „  J. Towers
      „  J. Tucker
      „  W. J. Tullock
      „  F. Turner
      „  T. Turner
      „  W. Turner
      „  C. Tyson
    Sgt. J. J. Tyson
    Pte. A. Venables
    Sgt. E. Vent
    Pte. A. E. Vickers
      „  R. Vickers
      „  W. Vinton
      „  F. Wain
      „  F. Waitson
      „  G. H. Wakefield
      „  J. Wakefield
      „  W. G. Wakefield
      „  D. Walker
      „  T. Walker
      „  W. Walker
      „  W. J. Walker
      „  T. Wall
      „  R. Wallace
      „  G. A. Walmsley
      „  R. Walmsley
      „  T. Walmsley
      „  J. Warburton
      „  H. Ward
      „  A. Wardle
      „  C. E. Warren
      „  A. Wassall
      „  G. Watkinson
      „  W. J. Watson
      „  R. Weaver
      „  F. Webster
      „  P. Webster
    Sgt. P. J. Wells
    Pte. P. Wesencroft
      „  C. Whalley
    L/Cpl. A. G. White
    Sgt. A. G. White
    Pte. E. C. Whiteley
    L/Cpl. R. A. Whiteman
    Pte. J. F. Whittaker
      „  R. Whittle
      „  J. Whottan
      „  F. Wiggins
      „  T. Wignall
      „  W. J. Wignall
      „  R. Wilcock
      „  E. Wild
      „  J. Wilding
      „  T. Wilkinson
      „  T. W. Wilkinson
      „  W. Wilkinson
      „  C. Williams
      „  F. Williams
    Cpl. H. Williams
      „  H. C. Williams
    Pte. J. Williams
      „  R. B. Williams
      „  S. Williams
      „  W. Williams
      „  W. Williamson
      „  G. B. Wilson
      „  H. Wilson
      „  J. T. Wilson
      „  J. H. Wilson
    L/Cpl. H. Wilson
      „  J. H. Wilson
    Cpl. J. Wilson
    Pte. P. Wilson
      „  J. Winder
    C.S.M. W. H. Winder
    L/Cpl. P. H. Wintle
    Pte. E. F. Wood
    L/Cpl. W. Wood
    Pte. E. Woodburn
      „  F. G. Woodburn
      „  W. Woodburn
      „  W. Woodend
      „  C. W. Woodhead
      „  E. Woodhouse
      „  J. Woodruff
      „  T. Woods
    Cpl. J. Woodward
    Pte. S. Woodward
    L/Sgt. W. J. Woodward
    Pte. W. Woof
      „  E. Worth
      „  W. Worthington
      „  A. J. Wright
    L/Sgt. T. Wright
    Pte. B. Wyld
      „  F. Yarwood
      „  R. A. Young




                             APPENDIX “G.”

                            RANK AND FILE.


                        MISSING--REPORTED DEAD.

    Pte. P. Allen
      „  N. Athersmith
      „  I. Atkinson
    L/Cpl. F. Baines
    Cpl. E. W. Barrow
    Pte. J. H. Barrow
    Cpl. G. Bell
    Pte. T. Blezard
      „  L. Bowker
      „  W. A. Bradley
      „  J. Brownlow
      „  J. Cameron
    L/Cpl. R. Clark
    Pte. T. Clark
      „  E. Colley
      „  J. Cowell
      „  H. Cross
      „  C. E. Crossley
    L/Cpl. R. Dobson
      „  W. Douglas
    Pte. J. Ellis
      „  W. Finch
      „  F. Futtes
      „  J. Halligan
      „  E. Hamblett
      „  J. Hart
    Cpl. N. Hill
    Pte. J. Hird
      „  J. Hodges
      „  S. Hough
      „  A. Hulme
      „  G. James
      „  F. Jenkinson
    Cpl. B. A. Lirby
    Pte. G. Liddle
      „  J. Littleford
      „  A. Loftus
      „  A. Morris
    L/Cpl. T. H. Newby
    Pte. J. Owen
      „  H. Park
      „  R. Postlethwaite
      „  J. H. Proctor
    L/Cpl. J. Robinson
    Pte. J. Simm
      „  T. Simpson
      „  W. Smith
      „  H. J. Snaith
      „  G. A. Stenhouse
      „  E. Stewart
    L/Cpl. W. J. Strode
    Pte. W. Swarbrick
    Sgt. J. Thistlethwaite
    Pte. T. M. Timperley
      „  C. H. Turner
      „  W. West
      „  H. Wilkins
      „  T. Williams
      „  S. J. Willis
      „  A. Wilson


                        WOUNDED AND PRISONERS.


    Pte. R. Allen
    Sgt. F. W. Canby
    Pte. G. Grosvenor
      „  J. W. Harrall
    Cpl. T. Hird
    Pte. T. Leck
      „  M. Newby
      „  S. Scotchford
      „  J. Smith
      „  T. Smith
      „  W. Tomlinson
      „  G. Wilson


                         WOUNDED AND MISSING.

    Pte. A. Bell
      „  T. Bell
      „  T. Bowen
    L/Cpl. J. Dickie
    Pte. R. Garnett
      „  J. H. Hall
    Cpl. T. Hird
    Pte. W. Leviston
      „  J. Logan
      „  H. Metters
      „  H. Newby
    Sgt. F. N. Postlethwaite
    Pte. R. Prisk
      „  I. T. Rowse
      „  E. H. Shelton
      „  H. Sprout
      „  W. Sykes
    Cpl. N. H. Taylor
    Pte. F. Williams
      „  J. J. Wilshaw
      „  G. H. Wright


                               MISSING.


    Sgt. J. Amos
    Pte. J. C. Anson
      „  H. W. Ashworth
      „  J. Ashworth
      „  A. Atkinson
    Cpl. T. Atkinson
    Pte. J. Atherton
      „  J. B. Atherton
      „  A. T. Barron
      „  J. Barton
      „  R. Bashall
      „  A. V. Bell
      „  A. Bennett
      „  F. Berry
      „  S. Berry
      „  T. B. Blake
      „  H. Boothman
    Sgt. H. Bradley
    Pte. J. H. Bradley
      „  L. Bray
      „  F. Briggs
      „  E. H. Brocklebank
      „  J. T. Brocklebank
      „  R. Brown
      „  R. Burrow
      „  J. Burrows
      „  J. Capstick
      „  G. Caton
      „  P. Chadderton
      „  W. Clark
    Sgt. B. Clarke
    Pte. C. Clarkson
      „  J. Clough
      „  J. H. Conning
      „  W. B. Cowper
      „  A. Crabb
      „  J. Craig
      „  A. Crammon
      „  E. Cross
      „  A. J. Crossling
      „  W. Crowther
      „  J. Cubitt
      „  S. Date
      „  T. A. Davies
      „  T. W. Davies
      „  B. Dixon
      „  J. Downham
      „  H. Doyle
      „  J. Dunn
      „  G. H. Durham
      „  A. Earnshaw
      „  J. E. Fawcett
      „  J. Fletcher
      „  A. Fox
      „  L. Fox
      „  C. W. Frearson
      „  T. Gamble
    L/Sgt. G. Grafton
    Pte. G. Graveson (Prisoner)
      „  H. Green
      „  J. B. Greenwood
      „  M. Grigg
      „  T. Hacking
    Sgt. A. A. Hall
    Pte. J. E. Harrison
      „  W. Harrison
      „  J. Hartley
      „  J. H. Hartley
      „  A. H. Hatton
      „  W. Hodgson
      „  R. Horne
      „  A. E. Hoult
    L/Cpl. T. Howcroft
    Pte. T. W. Huck
      „  J. H. Hudson
    L/Cpl. P. L. Hunter
    Pte. J. W. Ireland
    L/Cpl. E. Jackson
    Pte. R. James
      „  T. Jesson
      „  A. E. Johnson
      „  C. Johnson
      „  W. E. Johnson
      „  E. Jones
      „  J. L. Jones
      „  J. Kenny
      „  T. Leck
      „  W. Lee
      „  A. Lord
      „  J. Lorraine
      „  W. Lowe
      „  T. Lowery
      „  W. J. Lowther
      „  F. Mallon
    L/Cpl. L. Marsden
      „  F. Marwood
    Pte. T. Martin
      „  J. Mayor
    Cpl. J. Miller
    Pte. T. Mitchell
      „  I. Moore
      „  A. Moorey
      „  H. B. Mortimer
      „  A. L. McDonald
      „  T. McGuire
      „  T. McKitten
      „  B. E. Neave
      „  J. Nelson
      „  R. Newsham
      „  W. Nicholson
      „  W. Nutter
      „  J. O’Brien
    L/Cpl. A. J. Orders
    Pte. J. Orme
      „  C. R. Park
      „  J. Park
      „  W. Parry
      „  F. C. Pearce
      „  F. Pickthall
      „  F. Porter
      „  C. Prince
      „  R. Ralston
      „  J. Remmington
      „  E. Rimmer
      „  W. Rimmer
      „  D. Roberts
      „  H. Roberts
      „  P. C. Roberts
      „  E. G. Robinson
    Sgt. H. Robinson
    L/Cpl. H. Sanderson
    Pte. J. H. Saville
      „  J. Schofield
    L/Cpl. J. Seabridge
    Pte. W. Soddon
      „  T. Spencer
      „  W. J. Sprout
      „  J. Steele
      „  W. H. Steenson
      „  A. J. Taylor
    Sgt. S. Taylor
    Pte. J. Theobald
      „  J. Threlfall
    L/Cpl. E. Topping
    Pte. A. Turner
      „  T. Turner
      „  A. C. Vass
      „  A. Walker
      „  J. Walker
      „  F. Walpole
    L/Cpl. F. C. Wenham
    Pte. R. Whipp
      „  T. H. E. Whitehead
      „  T. Whitworth
    L/Cpl. J. Wilkinson
    Pte. T. Wilkinson
      „  C. Williams
      „  S. Williams
    Cpl. C. Wilson
    Pte. G. Wilson
      „  J. Winder
      „  P. Wood
      „  E. Woodburn
      „  R. Worrall
    Sgt. W. Worthington
    Pte. F. Wright


                           PRISONERS OF WAR.

    Cpl. T. Atkinson
    Pte. J. H. Athersmith
      „  J. Atherton
      „  H. W. Ashworth
    Sgt. T. Amos
    L/Cpl. E. D. Askew
    Pte. J. Athersmith
    L/Cpl. R. Bradshaw
    L/Sgt. P. Baines
    Pte. E. H. Brocklebank
      „  H. Billington
    L/Cpl. W. Baxter
    Pte. T. Bowen
      „  C. E. Barton
      „  T. E. Baxter
    Sgt. H. Bradley
    Pte. R. G. Baxter
      „  F. Baines
      „  P. Blezard
      „  S. Boundy
      „  L. Bray
      „  H. Bennett
      „  J. H. Bradley
      „  J. Barton
      „  A. F. Barron
      „  H. Berry
      „  J. Baglin
      „  R. Burrow
    Sgt. J. Borwick
    Pte. R. G. Barrow
    Cpl. F. Barker
    Pte. W. Brammall
      „  W. Barratt
      „  J. Clegg
      „  E. Clarke
      „  J. Clough
      „  T. Conroy
      „  M. Conway
      „  G. W. Cole
      „  T. Cookson
      „  J. Capstick
      „  C. Clarkson
      „  J. R. Chadwick
      „  A. J. Crossing
      „  P. Chadderton
      „  E. Cross
      „  J. H. Conning
      „  J. Craven
      „  W. Crowther
      „  T. W. Davies
      „  E. Douglass
      „  J. A. Dixon
      „  E. Dickinson
      „  B. Darcey
      „  A. E. Davies
      „  T. A. Davis
      „  R. Dent
      „  A. Dickson
      „  F. Evans
      „  A. Evans
      „  R. Eastwood
      „  A. Earnshaw
      „  J. J. B. Edgar
    Cpl. J. B. Edgar
    Pte. R. Elroy
      „  L. Fox
      „  W. Forbes
    Cpl. J. Fairhurst
    Pte. G. Graveson
      „  W. Gordon
    Cpl. W. Galamean
    Pte. J. Goldsmith
      „  G. Golding
      „  W. H. Gaffney
    L/Cpl. H. Green
    Pte. J. Gilmore
      „  F. Gamble
      „  A. W. Gould
      „  J. B. Greenwood
    Sgt. G. Grafton
    Pte. W. Harrison
      „  H. V. Hudson
      „  P. Howarth
    L/Cpl. F. Hardman
    Pte. J. Howarth
      „  S. Holt
      „  W. Hodgson
      „  B. Horn
      „  E. Harper
      „  E. Hill
      „  R. Helme (Died)
      „  T. Hacking
      „  P. L. Hunter
      „  A. E. Hoult
    L/Sgt. A. G. Hall
    Pte. H. J. Hall
    Cpl. J. Irving
    Pte. E. Jones (Died)
      „  J. H. Jackson (Died)
      „  J. L. Jones (Died)
      „  R. Jones
      „  J. F. Jones
      „  J. Jesson
    Cpl. R. Johnson
    Pte. E. Jackson
      „  J. Kelly
      „  G. W. Kelton
      „  F. Knapp
      „  J. Kenny
      „  J. Lees
    Cpl. J. Lindsay
    Pte. R. Lawton
      „  F. Lindsay
    Cpl. H. Lister
    Pte. W. Lee
    L/Cpl. J. Lowe
    Pte. F. W. Lane
      „  J. Lingard
      „  W. Lackey
      „  W. Lowery (Died)
      „  T. Lowery
      „  J. Moore
    L/Cpl. I. F. Marwood
    Pte. W. McNeill
      „  K. Memory
      „  J. McDonald
      „  J. Maxwell
      „  A. Moorey
    Sgt. W. Marshall
    Pte. T. McGuire
      „  I. McKitten
      „  B. B. Mortimer
      „  T. Mayor
      „  J. Nicholson
      „  F. J. Nicholls
      „  B. E. Neave
      „  W. Nicholson
      „  R. Orrell
      „  E. O’Neill
      „  G. E. Park
      „  W. A. Peach
      „  C. Prince
      „  J. G. Pinkney
      „  J. Park
      „  W. A. Pepper
      „  W. Parry
      „  H. Rigg
    Sgt. H. Robinson
    Pte. E. W. Rimmer
      „  R. H. Reay
      „  R. Ralston
      „  W. Rimmer
      „  E. H. Roberts
      „  H. Skirrow
      „  F. Stephenson
    L/Cpl. W. Shirt
    Sgt. F. Sherley
    L/Cpl. W. H. Steel
      „  H. Sanderson
    Pte. R. Simpson
      „  W. Seddon
    L/Cpl. J. Steel
      „  A. Seabridge
    Pte. W. Sharpe
      „  W. Troughton
    Cpl. F. H. Turner
    Pte. W. Shipperbottom (Died)
      „  A. J. Taylor
      „  W. H. Turner
    Pte. A. Turner
    L/Cpl. C. E. Taylor
    Pte. R. Taylor
      „  E. F. Topping
      „  J. Theobald
    L/Sgt. W. Travis
    Pte. J. Unsworth
      „  A. C. Vass
    L/Cpl. A. Whittle
    Pte. J. Waltho
      „  T. Williams
      „  J. J. Woodruff
      „  J. Worsley
      „  T. H. E. Whitehead
      „  E. S. Wood (Died)
      „  F. Ward
      „  J. Winder
      „  W. L. Williams
      „  J. Woodruffe
    Sgt. C. Williams
    Pte. C. W. Wells
    L/Cpl. J. Wilkinson
    Pte. R. Worrall
      „  A. Walker
      „  T. Whitworth
    Sgt. W. Worthington
    Pte. G. R. C. Weedon




                             APPENDIX “H.”

                        RANK AND FILE--AWARDS.


                            VICTORIA CROSS.

    L/Sgt. T. F. Mayson
    Cpl. J. Hewitson


                            MILITARY CROSS.

    C.S.M. R. A. Williams
    Sgt. W. Bell


                     DISTINGUISHED CONDUCT MEDAL.

    Sgt. J. S. Owen
    Cpl. A. E. Graves
    Sgt. R. Adamson
    Sgt. A. J. Burton
    L/Sgt.  G. Johnston
    Cpl. H. Martin
    L/Cpl.  J. Carrick
    Sgt. J. M. Cross
      „  J. R. Pearson
      „  G. Huddleston
    Sgt. W. H. Farish
    Pte. C. S. Milton
    C.S.M. D. Graham
      „    J. B. Cook
    Sgt. H. Dickinson, M.M.


                            MILITARY MEDAL.

    Pte. A. E. Ashburn
    Cpl. T. Balderston
    Pte. T. Binns
    Sgt. J. Birkett
    Pte. R. Bradley
      „  J. Bussingham
    Cpl. R. Carruthers
      „  J. Carton
    Sgt. T. J. Chapple
    L/Cpl.  T. Chester
    Pte. J. Cooley
    L/Cpl.  C. F. Cooper
    Pte. T. Cross (and Bar)
    Cpl. C. W. Crichton
    L/Cpl.  W. Danson
    L/Sgt. H. Dickinson, D.C.M.
    Sgt. H. Fearnley
    Pte. H. Green
      „  H. Helme
    L/Cpl.  G. Hewartson
    L/Cpl.  R. F. Hinde
    C.Q.M.S. W. G. Hinds
    C.S.M. G. Holme
    Sgt. A. C. Holmes
      „  A. H. Jackson
    Cpl. F. Jackson
    Sgt. R. N. Jackson
      „  R. Lockey
    Pte. L. Marsden
      „  G. Mackereth
    Sgt. T. H. Middleton (and Bar)
      „  A. Morris
      „  H. Myers
    Pte. J. McAlarney
    L/Cpl. W. McGill
    Pte. W. Nicholson
    Sgt. H. Parnell
    Sgt. H. W. Perceval
    Pte. G. Poskitt
    Sgt. T. G. Rathbone
    Pte. E. Redpath
      „  E. G. Robinson
    Sgt. T. Robinson
    Cpl. F. A. Sherley
    L/Sgt. H. Smith
    Pte. P. Stalker
      „  H. Stott
      „  R. Taylor
      „  J. W. Thomas
    L/Cpl. H. Q. Towers
    Cpl. P. J. Vernoun
    Pte. G. Wakefield
      „  G. H. Watson
    Sgt. W. T. Whiteside
    Pte. J. Wild
    L/Sgt. T. Wright


                       MENTIONED IN DESPATCHES.

    C.S.M. W. Bell
    Sgt. J. Coward
      „  W. Hayhurst
    Sgt. R. N. Jackson
    A/R.S.M. J. Way
    L/Cpl. P. Baines
    L/Cpl. T. Jackson
    Pte. J.A. Kitchen


                   BRONZE MEDAL FOR MILITARY VALOUR.

    C.S.M. R. Walker


                       BELGIAN CROIX-DE-GUERRE.

    Sgt. G. B. Collins


                      MERITORIOUS SERVICE MEDAL.

    R.Q.M.S. W. Clark
    Sgt. S. Hinds
    Sgt. W. Rickwood




                             APPENDIX “I.”

          _Extract from the Supplement dated 28th June, 1918,
            to the “London Gazette” dated 25th June, 1918._


WAR OFFICE, 28TH JUNE, 1918.

His Majesty The King has been graciously pleased to approve of
the award of the Victoria Cross to the undermentioned Officers,
Non-Commissioned Officers and Men:--

       *       *       *       *       *

   2nd Lieut. JOSEPH HENRY COLLIN, late Royal Lancaster
   Regiment.

For most conspicuous bravery, devotion to duty and self-sacrifice in
action.

After offering a long and gallant resistance against heavy odds in
the Keep held by his platoon, this officer, with only five of his men
remaining, slowly withdrew in the face of superior numbers, contesting
every inch of the ground. The enemy were pressing him hard with bombs
and machine gun fire from close range. Single-handed 2nd Lieutenant
Collin attacked the machine gun and team. After firing his revolver
into the enemy, he seized a Mills grenade and threw it into the hostile
team, putting the gun out of action, killing four of the team and
wounding two others. Observing a second hostile machine gun firing, he
took a Lewis gun, and selecting a high point of vantage on the parapet
whence he could engage the gun, he, unaided, kept the enemy at bay
until he fell mortally wounded.

The heroic self-sacrifice of 2nd Lieutenant Collin was a magnificent
example to all.




                             APPENDIX “J.”

       _Extract from the Supplement dated 14th September, 1917,
         to the “London Gazette” dated 14th September, 1917._


WAR OFFICE, 14TH SEPTEMBER, 1917.

His Majesty The King has been graciously pleased to approve of
the award of the Victoria Cross to the undermentioned Officers,
Non-Commissioned Officers, and Men:--

       *       *       *       *       *

   No. 200717, Corpl. (L/Sgt.) TOM FLETCHER MAYSON, Royal
   Lancaster Regiment (Silecroft, Cumberland).

For most conspicuous bravery and devotion to duty when with the leading
wave of the attack his platoon was held up by machine gun fire from a
flank.

Without waiting for orders, L/Sgt. Mayson at once made for the gun,
which he put out of action with bombs, wounding four of the team. The
remaining three of the team fled, pursued by L/Sgt. Mayson to a dugout
into which he followed them, and disposed of them with his bayonet.

Later, when clearing up a strong point, this non-commissioned officer
again tackled a machine gun single-handed, killing six of the team.

Finally, during an enemy counter-attack, he took charge of an isolated
post, and successfully held it till ordered to withdraw as his
ammunition was exhausted.

He displayed throughout the most remarkable valour and initiative.




                             APPENDIX “K.”

        _Extract from the Supplement dated 28th June, 1918, to
             the “London Gazette” dated 25th June, 1918._


THE WAR OFFICE, 28TH JUNE, 1918.

His Majesty The King has been graciously pleased to approve of
the award of the Victoria Cross to the undermentioned Officers,
Non-Commissioned Officers, and Men:--

       *       *       *       *       *

   No. 15883, Lance-Corporal JAMES HEWITSON, Royal
   Lancaster Regiment (Coniston).

For most conspicuous bravery, initiative and daring in action.

In a daylight attack on a series of crater posts, L/Cpl. Hewitson
led his party to their objective with dash and vigour, clearing the
enemy from both trench and dugouts, killing in one dugout six of the
enemy who would not surrender. After capturing the final objective,
he observed a hostile machine gun team coming into action against his
men. Working his way round the edge of the crater he attacked the team,
killing four and capturing one. Shortly afterwards he engaged a hostile
bombing party, which was attacking a Lewis gun post. He routed the
party, killing six of them.

The extraordinary feats of daring performed by this gallant N.C.O.
crushed the hostile opposition at this point.




                                INDEX.


    Albert, 34

    Albert, King of the Belgians, 135

    Albert, H.R.H. Prince, 135

    Alexander, Lieut. J. C., 77, 83, 89

    Anniversary, Third, 55th Divn., 135

    Armistice Day at Leuze, 133

    Artillery support inadequate, 28

    Ashburn, Pte. A. E., 102

    Authuille, 43

    Aveluy, 35

    Awards, Officers (App.)

    Awards, Rank and File (App.)


    Barrow, Capt. J. V. (App.)

    Barrow-in-Furness, 8

    Bathing, 29

    Barnes, Major N. E., 22, 42, 51, 52, 136

    Barratt, Capt. W. D., 50, 52

    Balfour, Lt. Col. G. B., 56, 67, 75, 85, 93, 102, 131

    Bates, L/Cpl., 46

    Bedford, 14

    B.E.F., Embarkation, 14

    Berguette, 16, 32

    Béthune, 17

    Bell, Sgt. W., 25, 26

    Belgian Croix-de-Guerre (App.)

    Birling, Gap, 14

    Bigland, Lieut. G., 24

    Boulogne, 15

    Bombs, Home Made, 21

    Bouzincourt, 33

    Bowman, 2nd-Lt., 46

    Bonningues-les-Ardres, 92

    Blain, Capt. T. R., 104

    Blamont Trenches, 53

    Brocklebank, Major H. A., 45, 50, 55, 75, 78, 89

    Bretencourt, 53

    Bradley, 2nd-Lt. R., 89

    Brockman, 2nd-Lt. A. J., 63

    Bronze Medal for Military Valour (App.)

    Brussels, 135

    Burton, Sgt. A., 101


    Casualties, G.W.R., 10

    Casualties, Officers (App.)

    Casualties, Rank and File (App.)

    Calonne-sur-la-Lys, 16

    Carrick, Pte. J., 39

    Carleton, Lt. Col. F. M., 43, 53, 56

    Caddy, Capt. J., 45, 53

    Caddy, Sgt. M., 79

    Candas, 51

    Chevening Park, 12

    Chislehurst Guard, 13

    Chapman, Lieut. C. G., 38, 51

    Christmas at Reclinghem, 108

    Chester, L/Cpl. T. (App.), 102

    Civilian Snipers, 30

    Clarke, Capt. J. A. T., 45, 56, 78

    Clark, Lieut. A. M., 66, 104

    Cornet Malo, 19

    Comforts from Home, 43

    Corless, 2nd-Lt., 50

    Cooper, L/Cpl. C. F., 83

    Collin, 2nd-Lt. J. H. (App.) I

    Crossley, Lieut. J., 81

    Craters Attack, 120

    Croix-de-Guerre, Belgian (App.)

    Cuckmere Haven, 14


    Dane, 2nd-Lt. R. S. (App.), 101, 135

    Dartnell, 2nd-Lt. A. J. (App.), 101, 104

    Derby, Earl of, K.G., 135

    Despatches--
      Mentioned in, Officers (App.)
      Rank and File (App.)

    Discipline, strained on G.W.R., 11

    Disappointment when left behind, 15

    Dixon, L/Cpl. T., 25

    Dixon, Driver “Dorcas”, 44

    Died of Wounds--
      Officers (App.)
      Rank and File (App.)

    Distinguished Conduct Medal (App.)

    Distinguished Service Order (App.)

    Dobbs, L/Cpl. H., 102

    Dungeness, 14


    East Lancs. Brigade, Possible transfer, 11

    Edwards, Brig. General, 41

    Egypt, possible destination, 11

    Ellwood, Lieut., 88, 93

    Elverdinghe, 78

    Embarkation for France, 14

    Equipment, New, Bedford, 14

    Equitation, 11, 49

    Estaires, 31

    Evans, Major J. H., 81, 92, 94


    Ferme-du-Bois, 18

    Festubert Attack, 22

    Ferns, 2nd-Lt., 56, 66

    Ferguson, 2nd-Lt. G. W. (App.), 101

    Fifty-First Division, 48

    Fifty-Fifth Division, 48

    Fisher, Capt. John (App.), 45

    Fisher, 2nd-Lt. James (App.), 55

    Field, 2nd-Lt. G. (App.), 101, 104

    Folkestone, 15

    Ford, Lieut. C. W. (App.), 77, 89

    Fromelles, 16


    Gardner, Lt. Col. R. (App.), 22, 24, 70, 77, 84, 93, 124, 132, 133,
        136

    Gatchell, Lieut. J. H. C. (App.), 46

    Gaulter, 2nd-Lt. J. R. (App.), 89

    Gendle, C.S.M., 55

    Gilling, 2nd-Lt. F. C. (App.), 89

    Givenchy, 110

    Glenie, 2nd-Lt. G. R. (App.), 69

    Gough, 2nd-Lt. B. H. (App.), 100

    Graham, C.S.M., 101

    Great Western Railway, 9

    Gribble, 2nd-Lt. (App.), 88


    Havre, 15

    Ham-en-Artois, 16

    Harper, Major-General, 29, 41

    Hart, 2nd-Lt. (App.), 79

    Haslam, 2nd-Lt. E. (App.), 93

    Hatcher, 2nd-Lt. R. G. (App.), 93, 97

    Hewitt, Lieut. E. (App.), 24

    Hénencourt, 40

    Hibbert, Brig. General, 7, 41

    Highland Division, 48

    Hilton, 2nd-Lt. (App.), 66

    Higginson, 2nd-Lt. R. W. (App.), 101, 136

    Hinds, C.Q.M.S., 102

    His Majesty The King, 134

    Hodgkinson, 2nd-Lt. H. H. (App.), 38, 42, 49, 66

    Holmes, Pte. “Jerry”, 56

    Howard, 2nd-Lt. E. D. (App.), 93

    Howard, 2nd-Lt. C. G. (App.), 97

    Holland, 2nd-Lt. C. J. (App.), 101

    Horne, Capt. R. H. (App.), 136

    Horne, General Sir H. S., 109

    Holmes, 2nd-Lt. (App.), 113

    Huthwaite, Capt. H. Y. (App.), 54, 66, 77, 78

    Hunter-Weston, General Sir A., 79

    Hunter, 2nd-Lt. (App.), 118, 119

    Hewitson, Cpl. J. (App.)


    Indian Native Troops, 16

    Ireland, 9


    Jackson, Capt V. A. (App.), 42, 66

    Jackson, Pte. H., 75

    Jackson, 2nd-Lt. (App.), 66

    Jeudwine, Major Gen. Sir H., 48, 54, 57, 67, 104, 135

    Johnstone, 2nd-Lt. (App.), 57, 89


    Keighley, 2nd-Lt. L. R. (App.), 100, 104

    Keller, 2nd-Lt. (App.), 41, 55

    King Albert of the Belgians, 135

    Kirkby Lonsdale, 7

    “Kitchener’s Army”, 17, 37

    Killed in Action--
      Officers (App.)
      Rank and File (App.)

    Knole Park, 12


    La Gorgue, 17, 30

    Laventie, 27

    La Boiselle, 36, 38

    Lambercourt, 68

    Lawson, 2nd-Lt. (App.), 66

    Lancashire Fusilier Officers, 77

    Lauder, 2nd-Lt. (App.), 88

    Latham, 2nd-Lt. (App.), 88, 101

    Le Touret, 19, 26

    Leave from France, 37

    Leslie, Lieut. B. A. (App.), 38, 67

    Leuze, 133

    Little, Major R. P. (App.), 46

    Lincey, 2nd-Lt. (App.), 60

    Lingford, 2nd-Lt. G. C. (App.), 96

    Locon, 17

    Longpré, 48

    Longavesnes, 100

    Lonsdale, 2nd-Lt. (App.), 88

    Lockey, Cpl. E., 102

    Lyon, 2nd-Lt. (App.), 113


    Margate, 13

    Martin, L/Cpl. H., 39

    Martinsart, 38

    Mayson, Sgt. T. F. (App.), 87, 94

    Mawson, Major J. M. (App.), 50

    Mackay, 2nd-Lt. J. (App.), 101, 104

    Masters, Cpl. W., 101

    Meteren, 17

    Méricourt-Ribemont, 32, 59

    Meyler, 2nd-Lt. E. D. M. (App.), 38

    Metcalf, 2nd-Lt. L. (App.), 66

    Metcalfe, 2nd-Lt. (App.), 66

    Mentioned in Despatches--
      Officers (App.)
      Rank and File (App.)

    Meritorious Service Medal (App.)

    McCall, 2nd-Lt. W. B. (App.)

    McClinton, 2nd-Lt. (App.)

    McAlarney, Pte. J., 83

    McGill, 2nd-Lt. J. A. (App.), 89

    McAndrew, 2nd-Lt. W. (App.), 101

    Middleton, Capt. T. H. (App.), 50, 70, 75, 89

    Missing--
      Officers (App.)
      Rank and File (App.)

    Millom Men excel, 43

    Milton, Pte. C., 75

    Military Cross--
      Officers (App.)
      Warrant Officers (App.)
      Medal (App.)

    Mobilization, 7

    Moulle, 81

    Morrell, Capt. R. D’A. (App.), 66

    Musketry, 12

    Munition Workers, 15

    Mudie, Lieut. (App.), 75, 77, 93

    Myatt, 2nd-Lt. (App.), 50

    Myers, Sgt. H., 102


    Neill, Capt. W. C. (App.), 53, 55, 56

    New Army in France, 17, 37

    Newbold, 2nd-Lt. C. H. (App.), 88, 97

    Nicholson, Pte. W., 75


    Officers--
      Who Mobilized with the Battalion (App.)
      Who embarked for France (App.)
      Additional Roll who served with the Battalion (App.)
      Killed in Action (App.)
      Died of Wounds (App.)
      Wounded in Action (App.)
      Missing (App.)
      Prisoners of War (App.)
      Awards (App.)
      Mentioned in Despatches (App.)


    Pacaut, 26

    Pattinson, Lieut. W. R. (App.), 77, 89

    Patterson, Lieut. J. S. (App.), 77

    Pearson, Capt. W. G. (App.), 24

    Pearson, Lieut. J. (App.), 77

    Pearson, L/Sgt. J. R., 110

    Perceval, Sgt. H. W., 75

    Pemberton, 2nd-Lt. A. H. (App.), 101

    Poperinghe, 74

    Powell, Capt. P. W. (App.), 81, 101, 136

    Portuguese Division, 111, 114

    Problems of Strength, 14

    Primitive Conditions, 16

    Procter, Capt. A. P. (App.), 92, 95, 100, 101

    Prisoners of War--
      Officers (App.)
      Rank and File (App.)

    Pritchard, Lieut. T. H. (App.), 93, 97, 136

    Prince of Wales, H.R.H., 135

    Prince Albert, H.R.H., 135

    Purnell, 2nd-Lt. R. L. (App.), 100

    Purnell, 2nd-Lt. G. J., 38


    Raeside, 2nd-Lt. G. F. (App.), 101, 113

    Railway Wood, 76

    Raid, Ypres, 78

    Rank and File--
      Killed in Action (App.)
      Died of Wounds (App.)
      Wounded in Action (App.)
      Missing, Reported Dead (App.)
      Wounded and Prisoners (App.)
      Wounded and Missing (App.)
      Missing (App.)
      Prisoners of War (App.)
      Awards (App.)

    Redoubt, Le Touret, 19

    Reclinghem, 108

    Richebourg L’Avoue, 17

    Riez-du-Vinage, 19

    Riviere, 54

    Rigg, 2nd-Lt. A. (App.), 131

    Robathan, Major P. E. (App.), 73, 80, 92, 93, 100

    Robinson, Pte. E. G., 102

    Rutherford, Major A. F. (App.), 45

    Rudduck, 2nd-Lt. (App.), 63

    Rundle, 2nd-Lt. J. R. (App.), 101, 104

    Russell, 2nd-Lt. G. N. (App.), 101

    Rudall, 2nd-Lt. A. (App.), 124


    Sandwich, 12

    Sevenoaks, 12

    Senton, 2nd-Lt. R. M. (App.), 92, 97

    Shoreham, 12

    Shuker, 2nd-Lt. F. J. (App.), 100

    Sittingbourne, 12

    Sheahan, Lieut. A. T. (App.), 77

    Simpson, Lieut. J. H. (App.), 77

    Slater, Capt. F. C. (App.), 77

    Smith, 2nd-Lt. (App.), 79

    Smith, 2nd-Lt. R. (App.), 101, 104

    Smith, 2nd-Lt. N. (App.), 101

    Slough, 9

    Snipers, Civilian, 30

    Southampton, 15

    Somme Battles, 60–72

    Sports, Tonbridge, 14

    Stockwell, Brig. General G. I., 75, 85, 109, 120, 135

    St. Omer, 82

    St. Emilie, 101

    Stalker, Sgt. P., 75

    Stewart, 2nd-Lt. W. M. (App.), 101, 118

    Strength Problems, 14

    Swainson, Lt. Col. J. L. (App.), 57, 66

    Sykes, Capt. H. R. (App.)

    Sykes, 2nd-Lt. J. H. (App.), 101, 104, 118


    Taylor, Lieut. G. F. (App.), 21, 23

    Taylor, 2nd-Lt. G. A. (App.), 97, 101

    Taylor, 2nd-Lt. P. C. (App.), 89

    Thirty-First July, 82–91

    Thorpe, 2nd-Lt. (App.), 55

    Thorpe, 2nd-Lt. A. J. (App.), 100

    Thompson, Lt. Col. R. (App.), 22, 27, 34, 38, 42

    Thompson, 2nd-Lt. J. (App.), 97

    Tillyard, Capt. (App.), 31, 32, 42, 50

    Titmas, Capt. (App.), 45

    Tonbridge, 13

    Topham, Lieut. G. (App.), 77

    Transport, Early, 8

    Transport, New, Bedford, 14

    Training, Sevenoaks, 12

    Transfers, T. F. to Line, 14

    Trenches, First Introduction, 18

    Trenches, Dilapidated, 19

    Twentieth September, 94–99

    Twentieth November, 102

    Tucker, Lieut. (App.), 124, 131, 135


    Uccle, 134

    Ulverston, 9, 136


    Valour, Bronze Medal (App.)

    Veevers, 2nd-Lt. (App.), 93

    Vickers Munition Workers, 15

    Victoria Cross (App.)

    Vincent, Pte. J., 42


    Wadham, Lt. Col. W. F. A. (App.), 7, 19, 21, 136

    Ward, 2nd-Lt. (App.), 41, 46

    Way, Capt. J. (App.), 75, 93

    Walker, 2nd-Lt. (App.), 24

    Walker, 2nd-Lt. S. F. (App.), 66, 89

    Walkden, 2nd-Lt. (App.), 100

    Warbrick, 2nd-Lt. (App.), 89

    West Lancashire Division, 48

    Welch, Lieut. J. (App.), 50, 66

    White, 2nd-Lt. E. T. (App.), 93, 96

    Whittaker, 2nd-Lt. N. (App.), 93

    Whiteside, L/Sgt. W., 102

    Whitmore, 2nd-Lt. (App.), 118

    Wilderness, The, 12

    Wilson, Capt. (App.), 53, 94

    Winnicott, L/Cpl. D. J., 50

    Wilcock, 2nd-Lt. J. M. (App.), 66

    Withey, Capt. C. E. (App.), 66, 88, 92, 96

    Williams, C.S.M., R. A., 75

    Williamson, Capt. F. H. (App.), 77

    Willett, 2nd-Lt. R. (App.), 77

    Wild, Pte. J., 102

    Woodward, L/Cpl., 38

    Wounded in Action--
      Officers (App.)
      Rank and File (App.)
      and Prisoners (App.)
      and Missing (App.)

    Wright, Capt. A.  A. (App.), 23, 51, 66

    Wright, Cpl. T., 102


    Yates, Sgt. F. S., 101

    Ypres, 73–96


                          CROWTHER & GOODMAN,
                               PRINTERS,
                 124, FENCHURCH STREET, LONDON, E.C.3.


Transcriber’s Note:

Obvious printer’s, spelling and punctuation errors have been silently
corrected.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 67393 ***
